                           B O O K   F I R S T

[1]
                             -=-=-  1  -=-=-

It was but a question of leaving their own contracted 'grounds', of crossing
the Avenue and proceeding then to Mr Betterman's gate, which even with the
deliberate step of a truly massive young person she could reach in three or
four minutes. So, making no other preparation than to open a vast pale-green
parasol, a portable pavilion from which there fluttered fringes, frills and
ribbons that made it resemble the roof of some Burmese palanquin or perhaps
even pagoda, she took her way while these accessories fluttered in the August
air, the morning freshness, and the soft sea-light. Her other draperies, white
and voluminous, yielded to the mild breeze in the manner of those of a ship
held back from speed yet with its canvas expanded; they conformed to their
usual law of suggestion that the large loose ponderous girl, mistress as she
might have been of the most expensive modern aids to the constitution of a
'figure', lived, as they said about her, [2] in wrappers and tea-gowns; so
that, save for her enjoying obviously the rudest health, she might have been
a convalescent creeping forth from the consciousness of stale bedclothes. She
turned in at the short drive, making the firm neat gravel creak under her
tread, and at the end of fifty yards paused before the florid villa, a
structure smothered in senseless architectural ornament, as if to put her
question to its big fair foolish face. How Mr Betterman might be this morning,
and what sort of a night he might have had, was what she wanted to learn --
an anxiety very real with her and which, should she be challenged, would
nominally and decently have brought her; but her finer interest was in the
possibility that Graham Fielder might have come.
  The clean blank windows, however, merely gave her the impression of so many
showy picture-frames awaiting their subjects; even those of them open to the
charming Newport day seemed to tell her at the most that nothing had happened
since the evening before and that the situation was still untouched by the
change she dreamt of. A person essentially unobservant of forms, which her
amplitude somehow never found of the right measure, so that she felt the
misfit in many cases ridiculous, she now passed round the house instead of
applying at the rather grandly gaping portal -- which might in all conscience
have accommodated her -- and, crossing a stretch of lawn to the quarter [3] of
the place turned to the sea, rested here again some minutes. She sought indeed
after a moment the support of an elaborately rustic bench that ministered to
ease and contemplation, whence she would rake much of the rest of the small
sloping domain; the fair prospect, the great sea spaces, the line of low
receding coast that bristled, either way she looked, with still more costly
'places', and in particular the proprietor's wide and bedimmed verandah, this
at present commonly occupied by her 'prowling' father, as she now always
thought of him, though if charged she would doubtless have admitted with the
candour she was never able to fail of that she herself prowled during these
days of tension quite as much as he.
  He would already have come over, she was well aware -- come over on grounds
of his own, which were quite different from hers; yet she was scarce the less
struck, off at her point of vantage, with the way he now sat unconscious of
her, at the outer edge and where the light pointed his presence, in a low
basket-chair which covered him in save for little more than his small sharp
shrunken profile, detached against the bright further distance, and his small
protrusive foot, crossed over a knee and agitated by incessant nervous motion
whenever he was thus locked in thought. Seldom had he more produced for her
the appearance from which she had during the last three years never known [4]
him to vary and which would have told his story, all his story, every inch
of it and with the last intensity, she felt, to a spectator capable of being
struck with him as one might after all happen to be struck. What she herself
recognised at any rate, and really at this particular moment as she had never
done, was how his having retired from active business, as they said, given up
everything and entered upon the first leisure of his life, had in the oddest
way the effect but of emphasising his absorption, denying his detachment and
presenting him as steeped up to the chin. Most of all on such occasions did
what his life had meant come home to her, and then most, frankly, did that
meaning seem small; it was exactly as the contracted size of his little
huddled figure in the basket-chair.
  He was a person without an alternative, and if any had ever been open to
him, at an odd hour or two, somewhere in his inner dimness, he had long since
closed the gate against it and now revolved in the hard-rimmed circle from
which he had not a single issue. You couldn't retire without something or
somewhere to retire to, you must have planted a single tree at least for
shade or be able to turn a key in some yielding door; but to say that her
extraordinary parent was surrounded by the desert was almost to flatter the
void into which he invited one to step. He conformed in short to his necessity
of absolute interest -- interest, that is, in his own private facts, which
were facts of [5] numerical calculation altogether: how could it not be
so when he had dispossessed himself, if there had even been the slightest
selection in the matter, of every faculty except the calculating? If he hadn't
thought in figures how could he possibly have thought at all -- and oh the
intensity with which he was thinking at that hour! It was as if she literally
watched him just then and there dry up in yet another degree to everything
but his genius. His genius might at the same time have gathered in to a point
of about the size of the end of a pin. Such at least was the image of these
things, or a part of it, determined for her under the impression of the
moment.
  He had come over with the same promptitude every morning of the last
fortnight and had stayed on nearly till luncheon, sitting about in different
places as if they were equally his own, smoking, always smoking, the big
portentously 'special' cigars that were now the worst thing for him and lost
in the thoughts she had in general long since ceased to wonder about, taking
them now for granted with an indifference from which the apprehension we have
noted was but the briefest of lapses. He had over and above that particular
matter of her passing perception, he had as they all had, goodness knew, and
as she herself must have done not least, the air of waiting for something he
didn't speak of and in fact couldn't gracefully mention; with which moreover
the adopted [6] practice, and the irrepressible need of it, that she had been
having under her eye, brought out for her afresh, little as she invited or
desired any renewal of their salience, the several most pointed parental signs
-- harmless oddities as she tried to content herself with calling them, but
sharp little symbols of stubborn little facts as she would have felt them
hadn't she forbidden herself to feel. She had forbidden herself to feel, but
was none the less as undefended against one of the ugly truths that hovered
there before her in the charming silver light as against another. That the
terrible little man she watched at his meditations wanted nothing in the world
so much in these hours as to know what was 'going to be left' by the old
associate of his operations and sharer of his spoils -- this, as Mr Gaw's sole
interest in the protracted crisis, matched quite her certainty of his sense
that, however their doomed friend should pan out, two-thirds of the show would
represent the unholy profits of the great wrong he himself had originally
suffered.
  This she knew was what it meant -- that her father should perch there like a
ruffled hawk, motionless but for his single tremor, with his beak, which had
pecked so many hearts out, visibly sharper than ever, yet only his talons
nervous; not that he at last cared a straw, really, but that he was incapable
of thought save in sublimities of arithmetic, and that the question of what
old [7] Frank would have done with the fruits of his swindle, on the occasion
of the rupture that had kept them apart in hate and vituperation for so many
years, was one of the things that could hold him brooding, day by day and
week by week, after the fashion of a philosopher tangled in some maze of
metaphysics. As the end, for the other participant in that history, appeared
to draw near, she had with the firmest, wisest hand she could lay on it
patched up the horrid difference; had artfully induced her father to take a
house at Newport for the summer, and then, pleading, insisting, that they
should in common decency, or, otherwise expressed, in view of the sick man's
sore stricken state, meet again, had won the latter round, unable as he was
even then to do more than shuffle downstairs and take an occasional drive, to
some belief in the sincerity of her intervention. She had got at him -- under
stress of an idea with which her ostensible motive had nothing to do; she had
obtained entrance, demanding as all from herself that he should see her, and
had little by little, to the further illumination of her plan, felt that she
made him wonder at her perhaps more than he had ever wondered at anything; so
that after this everything else was a part of that impression.
  Strange to say, she had presently found herself quite independently
interested; more interested than by any transaction, any chapter of
intercourse, [8] in her whole specifically filial history. Not that it
mattered indeed if, in all probability -- and positively so far back as during
the time of active hostilities -- this friend and enemy of other days had been
predominantly in the right: the case, at the best and for either party, showed
so scantly for edifying that where was the light in which her success could
have figured as a moral or a sentimental triumph? There had been no real
beauty for her, at its apparent highest pitch, in that walk of the now more
complacently valid of the two men across the Avenue, a walk taken as she and
her companion had continued regularly to take it since, that he might hold out
his so long clenched hand, under her earnest admonition, to the antagonist cut
into afresh this year by sharper knives than any even in Gaw's armoury. They
had consented alike to what she wished, and without knowing why she most
wished it: old Frank, oddly enough, because he liked her, as she felt, for
herself, once she gave him the chance and took all the trouble; and her father
because -- well, that was an old story. For a long time now, three or four
years at least, she had had, as she would have said, no difficulty with him;
and she knew just when, she knew almost just how, the change had begun to
show.
  Signal and supreme proof had come to him one day that save for his big plain
quiet daughter (quiet, that is, unless when she knocked over a light [9] gilt
chair or swept off a rash table-ornament in brushing expansively by) he was
absolutely alone on the human field, utterly unattended by any betrayal
whatever that a fellow-creature could like him or, when the inevitable
day should come, could disinterestedly miss him. She knew how of old her
inexplicable, her almost ridiculous type had disconcerted and disappointed
him; but with this, at a given moment, it had come to him that she represented
quantity and mass, that there was a great deal of her, so that she would have
pressed down even a balance appointed to weigh bullion; and as there was
nothing he was fonder of than such attestations of value he had really ended
by drawing closer to her, as who should say, and by finding countenance in the
breadth of personal and social shadow that she projected. This was the sole
similitude about him of a living alternative, and it served only as she
herself provided it. He had actually turned into a personal relation with
her as he might have turned, out of the glare and the noise and the harsh
recognitions of the market, into some large cool dusky temple; a place where
idols other than those of _his_ worship vaguely loomed and gleamed, so that
the effect at moments might be rather awful, but where at least he could
sit very still, could breathe very softly, could look about obliquely and
discreetly, could in fact wander a little on tiptoe and treat the place, with
a mixture of pride and fear, almost as his own. [10]
  He had brooded and brooded, even as he was brooding now; and that habit she
at least had in common with him, though their subjects of thought were so
different. Thus it was exactly that she began to make out at the time his
actual need to wonder at her, the only fact outside his proper range that had
ever cost him a speculative impulse, still more a speculative failure; even as
she was to make it out later on in the case of their Newport neighbour, and
to recognise above all that though a certain savour of accepted discomfort
had, in the connection, to pervade her father's consciousness, no taste of
resentment was needed, as in the present case, to sweeten it. Nothing had
more interested our intelligent young woman than to note in each of these
overstrained, yet at the same time safely resting accumulators -- and to
note it as a thing unprecedented up to this latest season -- an unexpressed,
even though to some extent invoked, relief under the sense, the confirmed
suspicion, of certain anomalies of ignorance and indifference as to what they
themselves stood for, anomalies they could scarcely have begun, on the first
glimmer, by so much as taking for realities. It had become verily, on the part
of the poor bandaged and bolstered and heavily-breathing object of her present
solicitude, as she had found it on that of his still comparatively agile and
intensely acute critic, the queer mark of an inward relief to meet, so far as
they had arts or terms for it, any [11] intimation of what she might have to
tell them. From _her_ they would take things they never could have taken, and
never had, from anyone else. There were some such intimations that her father,
of old, had only either dodged with discernible art or directly set his little
white face against; he hadn't wanted them, and had in fact been afraid of them
-- so that after all perhaps his caring so little what went on in any world
not subject to his direct intelligence might have had the qualification that
he guessed she could imagine, and that to see her, or at least to feel her,
imagine was like the sense of an odd draught about him when doors and windows
were closed.
  Up in the sick man's room the case was quite other; she had been admitted
there but three times, very briefly, and a week had elapsed since the last,
yet she had created in him a positive want to communicate, or at any rate to
receive communication. She shouldn't see him again -- the pair of doctors and
the trio of nurses had been at one about that; but he had caused her to be
told that he liked to know of her coming and hoped she would make herself
quite at home. This she took for an intended sign, a hint that what she had
in spite of difficulties managed to say now kept him company in the great
bedimmed and disinfected room from which other society was banished. Her
father in fine he ignored after that not particularly beautiful moment of bare
recognition brought [12] about by her at the bedside; her father was the last
thing in the world that actually concerned him. But his not ignoring herself
could but have a positive meaning; which was that she had made the impression
she sought. Only _would_ Graham Fielder arrive in time? She was not in a
position to ask for news of him, but was sure each morning that if there had
been any gage of this Miss Mumby, the most sympathetic of the nurses and
with whom she had established a working intelligence, would be sufficiently
interested to come out and speak to her. After waiting a while, however, she
recognised that there could be no Miss Mumby yet and went over to her father
in the great porch.
  "Don't you get tired," she put to him, "of just sitting round here?"
  He turned to her his small neat finely-wrinkled face, of an extreme
yellowish pallor and which somehow suggested at this end of time an empty
glass that had yet held for years so much strong wine that a faint golden
tinge still lingered on from it. "I can't get any more tired than I am
already." His tone was flat, weak and so little charged with petulance that it
betrayed the long habit of an almost exasperating mildness. This effect, at
the same time, so far from suggesting any positive tradition of civility was
somehow that of a commonness instantly and peculiarly exposed. "It's a better
place than ours," he added in a moment. [13] "But I don't care." And then he
went on: "I guess I'd be more tired in your position."
  "Oh you know I'm never tired. And now," said Rosanna, "I'm too interested."
  "Well then, so am I. Only for me it ain't a position."
  His daughter still hovered with her vague look about. "Well, if it's one for
me I feel it's a good one. I mean it's the right one."
  Mr Gaw shook his little foot with renewed intensity, but his irony was not
gay. "The right one isn't always a good one. But ain't the question what _his_
is going to be?"
  "Mr Fielder's? Why, of course," said Rosanna quietly. "That's the whole
interest."
  "Well then you've got to fix it."
  "I consider that I _have_ fixed it -- I mean if we can hold out."
  "Well" -- and Mr Gaw shook on -- "I guess _I_ can. It's pleasant here," he
went on, "even if it _is_ funny."
  "Funny?" his daughter echoed -- yet inattentively, for she had become aware
of another person, a middle-aged woman, but with neatly-kept hair already
grizzled and in a white dress covered with a large white apron, who stood at
the nearest opening of the house. "Here we are, you see, Miss Mumby -- but any
news?" Miss Gaw was instantly eager.
  "Why he's right there upstairs," smiled the [14] lady of the apron, who was
clearly well affected to the speaker.
  This young woman flushed for pleasure. "Oh how splendid! But when did he
come?"
  "Early this morning -- by the New York boat. I was up at five, to change
with Miss Ruddle, and there of a sudden were his wheels. He seems so nice!"
Miss Mumby beamed.
  Rosanna's interest visibly rose, though she was prompt to explain it. "Why
it's _because_ he's nice! And he has seen him?"
  "He's seeing him now -- alone. For five minutes. Not all at once." But Miss
Mumby was visibly serene.
  This made Miss Gaw rejoice. "I'm not afraid. It will do him good. It has
_got_ to!" she finely declared.
  Miss Mumby was so much at ease that she could even sanction the joke. "More
good than the strain of waiting. They're quite satisfied." Rosanna knew these
judges for Doctor Root and Doctor Hatch, and felt the support of her friend's
firm freshness. "So we can hope," this authority concluded.
  "Well, let my daughter run it---!" Abel Gaw had got up as if this change in
the situation qualified certain proprieties, but turned his small sharpness
to Miss Mumby, who had at first produced in him no change of posture. "Well,
if he couldn't stand _me_ I suppose it was because he knows me -- and [15]
doesn't know this other man. _May_ Mr Fielder prove acceptable!" he added,
stepping off the verandah to the path. But as that left Rosanna's share in the
interest still apparently unlimited he spoke again. "Is it going to make you
settle over here?"
  This mild irony determined her at once joining him, and they took leave
together of their friend. "Oh I feel it's right now!" She smiled back at Miss
Mumby, whose agitation of a confirmatory hand before disappearing as she had
come testified to the excellence of the understanding between the ladies, and
presently was trailing her light vague draperies over the grass beside her
father. They might have been taken to resemble as they moved together a big
ship staying its course to allow its belittled tender to keep near, and the
likeness grew when after a minute Mr Gaw himself stopped to address his
daughter a question. He had, it was again marked, so scant a range of
intrinsic tone that he had to resort for emphasis or point to some other
scheme of signs -- this surely also of no great richness, but expressive of
his possibilities when once you knew him. "Is there any reason for your not
telling me why you're so worked up?"
  His companion, as she paused for accommodation, showed him a large flat
grave face in which the general intention of deference seemed somehow to
confess that it was often at the mercy -- and perhaps most in this particular
relation -- of such an inward [16] habit of the far excursion as could but
incorrigibly qualify for Rosanna Gaw certain of the forms of attention,
certain of the necessities of manner. She was, sketchily speaking, so much
higher-piled a person than her father that the filial attitude in her suffered
at the best from the occasional air of her having to come down to him. You
would have guessed that she was not a person to cultivate that air; and
perhaps even if very acute would have guessed some other things bearing on
the matter from the little man's careful way with her. This pair exhibited
there in the great light of the summer Sunday morning more than one of the
essential, or perhaps the rather finally constituted, conditions of their
intercourse. Here was a parent who clearly appealed to nobody in the world but
his child, and a child who condescended to nobody in the world but her parent;
and this with the anomaly of a constant care not to be too humble on one side
and an equal one not to be too proud on the other. Rosanna, her powerful
exposed arm raised to her broad shoulder, slowly made her heavy parasol
revolve, flinging with it a wide shadow that enclosed them together, for their
question and answer, as in a great bestreamered tent. "Do I strike you as
worked up? Why I've tried to keep as quiet about it as I possibly could -- as
one does when one wants a thing so tremendously much."
  His eyes had been raised to her own, but after she [17] had said this in her
perfunctory way they sank as from a sense of shyness and might have rested for
a little on one of their tent-pegs. "Well, daughter, that's just what I want
to understand -- your personal motive."
  She gave a sigh for this, a strange uninforming sigh. "Ah father, 'my
personal motives'---!"
  With this she might have walked on, but when he barred the way it was as
if she could have done so but by stepping on him. "I don't complain of your
personal motives -- I want you to have all you're entitled to and should like
to know who's entitled to more. But couldn't you have a reason once in a while
for letting me know what some of your reasons are?"
  Her decent blandness dropped on him again, and she had clearly this time
come further to meet him. "You've always wanted me to have things I don't care
for -- though really when you've made a great point of it I've often tried.
But want me now to have this." And then as he watched her again to learn what
'this', with the visibly rare importance she attached to it, might be: "To
make up to a person for a wrong I once did him."
  "You wronged the man who has come?"
  "Oh dreadfully!" Rosanna said with great sweetness.
  He evidently held that any notice taken of anyone, to whatever effect, by
this great daughter of his was nothing less than an honour done, and [18]
probably overdone; so what preposterous 'wrong' could count? The worst he
could think of was still but a sign of her greatness. "You wouldn't have him
round---?"
  "Oh that would have been nothing!" she laughed; and this time she sailed on
again.


                             -=-=-  2  -=-=-

Rosanna found him again after luncheon shaking his little foot from the depths
of a piazza chair, but now on their own scene and at a point where this
particular feature of it, the cool spreading verandah, commanded the low green
cliff and a part of the immediate approach to the house from the seaward side.
She left him to the only range of thought of which he was at present capable
-- she was so perfectly able to follow it; and it had become for that matter
an old story that as he never opened a book, nor sought a chance for talk, nor
took a step of exercise, nor gave in any manner a sign of an unsatisfied want,
the extent of his vacancy, a detachment in which there just breathed a hint of
the dryly invidious, might thus remain unbroken for hours. She knew what he
was waiting for, and that if she hadn't been there to see him he would take
his way across to the other house again, where the plea of solicitude for his
old friend's state put him at his ease and where, [19] moreover, as she now
felt, the possibility of a sight of Graham Fielder might reward him. It was
disagreeable to her that he should have such a sight while she denied it to
her own eyes; but the sense of their common want of application for their
faculties was a thing that repeatedly checked in her the expression of
judgments. Their idleness was as mean and bare on her own side, she too much
felt, as on his; and heaven knew that if he could sit with screwed-up eyes
for hours the case was as flagrant in her aimless driftings, her incurable
restless revolutions, as a pretence of 'interests' could consort with.
  She revolved and drifted then, out of his sight and in another quarter of
the place, till four o'clock had passed; when on returning to him she found
his chair empty and was sure of what had become of him. There _was_ nothing
else in fact for his Sunday, as he on that day denied himself the resource of
driving, or rather of being driven, from which the claim of the mechanical car
had not, in the Newport connection, won him, and which, deep in his barouche,
behind his own admirable horses, could maintain him in meditation for
meditation's sake quite as well as a poised rocking-chair. Left thus to
herself, though conscious she well might have visitors, she circled slowly and
repeatedly round the gallery, only pausing at last on sight of a gentleman who
had come into view by a path from the cliff. He presented himself in a minute
as Davey [20] Bradham, and on drawing nearer called across to her without
other greeting: "Won't you walk back with me to tea? Gussy has sent me to
bring you."
  "Why yes, of course I will -- that's nice of Gussy," she replied; adding
moreover that she wanted a walk, and feeling in the prospect, though she
didn't express this, a relief to her tension and a sanction for what she
called to herself her tact. She might without the diversion not quite have
trusted herself not to emulate, and even with the last crudity, her father's
proceeding; which she knew she should afterwards be ashamed of. "Anyone that
comes here," she said, "must come on to you -- they'll know;" and when Davey
had replied that there wasn't the least chance of anyone's not coming on
she moved with him down the path, at the end of which they entered upon the
charming cliff walk, a vast carpet of undivided lawns, kept in wondrous
condition, with a meandering right-of-way for a seaward fringe and bristling
wide-winged villas that spoke of a seated colony; many of these huge presences
reducing to marginal meanness their strip of the carpet.
  Davey was, like herself, richly and healthily replete, though with less
of his substance in stature; a frankly fat gentleman, blooming still at
eight-and-forty, with a large smooth shining face, void of a sign of moustache
or whisker and crowned with dense dark hair cropped close to his head after
the fashion of a French schoolboy or the [21] inmate of a jail. But for his
half-a-dozen fixed wrinkles, as marked as the great rivers of a continent on a
map, and his thick and arched and active eyebrows, which left almost nothing
over for his forehead, he would have scarce exhibited features -- in spite
of the absence of which, however, he could look in alternation the most
portentous things and the most ridiculous. He would hang up a meaning in his
large empty face as if he had swung an awful example on a gibbet, or would let
loose there a great grin that you somehow couldn't catch in the fact but that
pervaded his expanses of cheek as poured wine pervades water. He differed
certainly from Rosanna in that he enjoyed, visibly, all he carnally possessed
-- whereas you could see in a moment that she, poor young woman, would have
been content with, would have been glad of, a scantier allowance. "You'll find
Cissy Foy, to begin with," he said as they went; "she arrived last night and
told me to tell you she'd have walked over with me but that Gussy wants her
for something. However, as you know, Gussy always wants her for something --
she wants everyone for something so much more than something for everyone --
and there are none of us that are not worked hard, even though we mayn't bloom
on it like Cissy, who, by the way, is looking a perfect vision."
  "Awfully lovely?" -- Rosanna clearly saw as she asked. [22]
  "Prettier than at any time yet, and wanting tremendously to hear from you,
you know, about your prot'eg'e -- what's the fellow's name? Graham Fielder? --
whose arrival we're all agog about."
  Rosanna pulled up in the path; she somehow at once felt her possession of
this interest clouded -- shared as yet as it had been only with her father,
whose share she could control. It then and there came to her in one of the
waves of disproportionate despair in which she felt half the impressions of
life break, that she wasn't going to be able to control at all the great
participations. She had a moment of reaction against what she had done; she
liked Gray to be called her prot'eg'e -- forced upon her as endless numbers of
such were, he would be the only one in the whole collection who hadn't himself
pushed at her; but with the big bright picture of the villas, the palaces, the
lawns and the luxuries in her eyes, and with something like the chink of money
itself in the murmur of the breezy little waves at the foot of the cliff, she
felt that, without her having thought of it enough in advance, she had handed
him over to complications and relations. These things shimmered in the silver
air of the wondrous perspective ahead, the region off there that awaited
her present approach and where Gussy hovered like a bustling goddess in the
enveloping cloud of her court. The man beside her was the massive Mercury of
this urgent Juno; but -- without mythological comparisons, [23] which we make
for her under no hint that she could herself have dreamed of one -- she found
herself glad just then that she liked Davey Bradham, and much less sorry than
usual that she didn't respect him. An extraordinary thing happened, and all in
the instant before she spoke again. It was very strange, and it made him look
at her as if he wondered that his words should have had so great an effect as
even her still face showed. There was absolutely no one, roundabout and far
and wide, whom she positively wanted Graham to know; no not one creature of
them all -- 'all' figuring for her, while she stood, the great collection
at the Bradhams'. She hadn't thought of this before in the least as it came
to her now; yet no more had she time to be sure that even with the sharper
consciousness she would, as her father was apt to say, have acted different.
So much was true, yet while she still a moment longer hung fire Davey rounded
himself there like something she could comparatively rest on. "How in the
world," she put to him then, "do you know anything away off there---? He _has_
come to his uncle, but so quietly that I haven't yet seen him."
  "Why, my dear thing, is it new to you that we're up and doing -- bright and
lively? We're the most intelligent community on all this great coast, and when
precious knowledge is in the air we're not to be kept from it. We knew at
breakfast that the New York boat had brought him, [24] and Gussy of course
wants him up to dinner to-night. Only Cissy claims, you see, that she has
rights in him first -- rights beyond Gussy's, I mean," Davey went on; "I don't
know that she claims them beyond yours."
  She looked abroad again, his companion, to earth and sea and sky; she
wondered and felt threatened, yet knowing herself at the same time a long way
off from the point at which menace roused her to passion. She had always to
suffer so much before that, and was for the present in the phase of feeling
but weak and a little sick. But there was always Davey. She started their walk
again before saying more, while he himself said things that she didn't heed.
"I can't for the life of me imagine," she nevertheless at last declared, "what
Cissy has to do with him. When and where has she ever seen him?"
  Davey did as always his best to oblige. "Somewhere abroad, some time back,
when she was with her mother at some baths or some cure-place. Though when I
think of it," he added, "it wasn't with the man himself -- it was with some
relation: hasn't he an uncle, or perhaps a stepfather? Cissy seems to know all
about him, and he takes a great interest in her."
  It again all but stopped Rosanna. "Gray Fielder an interest in Cissy---?"
  "Let me not," laughed Davey, "sow any seed of trouble or engage for more
than I can stand to. [25] She'll tell you all about it, she'll clothe it in
every grace. Only I assure you I myself am as much interested as anyone," he
added -- "interested, I mean, in the question of whether the old man there has
really brought him out at the last gasp this way to do some decent thing about
him. An impression prevails," he further explained, "that you're in some
wonderful way in the old wretch's confidence, and I therefore make no bones of
telling you that your arrival on our scene there, since you're so good as to
consent to come, has created an impatience beyond even what your appearances
naturally everywhere create. I give you warning that there's no limit to what
we want to know."
  Rosanna took this in now as she so often took things -- working it down in
silence at first: it shared in the general weight of all direct contributions
to her consciousness. It might then, when she spoke, have sunk deep. She
looked about again, in her way, as if under her constant oppression, and
seeing, a little off from their gravelled walk, a public bench to which a
possible path branched down, she said, on a visibly grave decision: "Look
here, I want to talk to _you_ -- you're one of the few people in all your
crowd to whom I really can. So come and sit down."
  Davey Bradham, arrested before her, had an air for his responsibilities that
quite matched her own. "Then what becomes of them all there?" [26]
  "I don't care a hang what becomes of them. But if you want to know," Rosanna
said, "I do care what becomes of Mr Fielder, and I trust you enough, being as
you are the only one of your lot I do trust, to help me perhaps a little to do
something about it."
  "Oh, my dear lady, I'm not a bit discreet, you know," Mr Bradham amusedly
protested; "I'm perfectly unprincipled and utterly indelicate. How can a
fellow not be who likes as much as I do at all times to make the kettle boil
and the plot thicken? I've only got my beautiful intelligence, though, as I
say, I don't in the least _want_ to embroil you. Therefore if I can really
help you as the biggest babbler alive---!"
  She waited again a little, but this time with her eyes on his good worn
worldly face, superficially so smooth, but with the sense of it lined and
scratched and hacked across much in the manner of the hard ice of a large pond
at the end of a long day's skating. The amount of obstreperous exercise that
had been taken on that recording field! The difference between our pair, thus
confronted, might have been felt as the greater by the very fact of their
outward likeness as creatures so materially weighted; it would have been
written all over Rosanna for the considering eye that every grain of her load,
from innermost soul to outermost sense, was that of reality and sincerity;
whereas it might by the same token have been [27] felt of Davey that in the
temperature of life as he knew it his personal identity had been, save for
perhaps some small tough lurking residuum, long since puffed away in pleasant
spirals of vapour. Our young woman was at this moment, however, less
interested in quantities than in qualities of candour; she could get what
passed for it by the bushel, by the ton, whenever, right or left, she chose to
chink her pocket. Her requirement for actual use was such a glimmer from the
candle of truth as a mere poor woman might have managed to kindle. What was
left of precious in Davey might thus have figured but as a candle-end; yet for
the lack of it she should perhaps move in darkness. And her brief intensity of
watch was in a moment rewarded; her companion's candle-end was his not quite
burnt-out value as a gentleman. This was enough for her, and she seemed to see
her way. "If I don't trust you there's nobody else in all the wide world I
can. So you've got to know, and you've got to be good to me."
  "Then what awful thing _have_ you done?" he was saying to her three minutes
after they had taken their place temporarily on the bench.
  "Well, I got at Mr Betterman," she said, "in spite of all the difficulty.
Father and he hadn't spoken for years -- had had long ago the blackest,
ugliest difference; believing apparently the horridest things of each other.
Nevertheless it was as father's daughter that I went to him -- [28] though
after a little, I think, it was simply for the worth itself of what I had to
tell him that he listened to me."
  "And what you had to tell him," Davey asked while she kept her eyes on the
far horizon, "_was_ then that you take this tender interest in Mr Fielder?"
  "You may make my interest as ridiculous as you like---!"
  "Ah, my dear thing," Davey pleadingly protested, "don't deprive me, please,
of _anything_ nice there is to know!"
  "There was something that had happened years ago -- a wrong I perhaps had
done him, though in perfect good faith. I thought I saw my way to make up for
it, and I seem to have succeeded beyond even what I hoped."
  "Then what have you to worry about?" said Davey.
  "Just my success," she answered simply. "Here he is and I've done it."
  "Made his rich uncle want him -- who hadn't wanted him before? Is that it?"
  "Yes, interfered afresh in his behalf -- as I had interfered long ago. When
one has interfered one can't help wondering," she gravely explained.
  "But dear lady, ever for his benefit of course," Davey extemporised.
  "Yes -- except for the uncertainty of what _is_ for a person's benefit. It's
hard enough to know," said Rosanna, "what's for one's own." [29]
  "Oh, as to that," Davey joked, "I don't think that where mine's concerned
I've ever a doubt! But is the point that the old man had quarrelled with him
and that you've brought about a reconciliation?"
  She considered again with her far-wandering eyes; as if both moved by her
impulse to confidence and weighted with the sense of how much of it there all
was. "Well, in as few words as possible, it was like this. He's the son but
of a half-sister, the daughter of Mr Betterman's father by a second marriage
which he in his youth hadn't at all liked, and who made her case worse with
him, as time went on, by marrying a man, Graham's father, whom he had also
some strong objection to. Yes," she summarized, "he seems to have been
difficult to please, but he's making up for it now. His brother-in-law didn't
live long to suffer from the objection, and the sister, Mrs Fielder, left a
widow badly provided for, went off with her boy, then very young, to Europe.
There, later on, during a couple of years that I spent abroad with my mother,
we met them and for the time saw much of them; she and my dear mother greatly
took to each other, they formed the friendliest relation, and we had in common
that my father's business association with Mr Betterman still at that time
subsisted, though the terrible man -- as he then was -- hadn't at all made it
up with our friend. It was while we were with her [30] in Dresden, however,
that something happened which brought about, by correspondence, some renewal
of intercourse. This was a matter on which we were in her confidence and
in which we took the greatest interest, for we liked also the other person
concerned in it. An opportunity had come up for her to marry again, she had
practically decided to embrace it, and of this, though everything between them
had broken off so short, her unforgiving brother had heard, indirectly, in New
York."
  Davey Bradham, lighting cigarettes, and having originally placed his case,
in a manner promptly appreciated, at his companion's disposal, crowned this
now adjusted relation with a pertinence of comment. "And only again of course
to be as horrid as possible about it! He hated husbands in general."
  "Well, he himself, it was to be said, had been but little of one. He had
lost his own wife early and hadn't married again -- though he was to lose
early also the two children born to him. The second of these deaths was recent
at the time I speak of, and had had to do, I imagine, with his sudden overture
to his absent relations. He let his sister know that he had learnt her
intention and thought very ill of it, but also that if she would get rid of
her low foreigner and come back with the boy he would be happy to see what
could be done for them." [31]
  "What a jolly situation!" -- Davey exhaled fine puffs. "Her second choice
then -- at Dresden -- was a German adventurer?"
  "No, an English one, Mr Northover; an adventurer only as a man in love
is always one, I suppose, and who was there for us to see and extremely to
approve. He had nothing to do with Dresden beyond having come on to join her;
they had met elsewhere, in Switzerland or the Tyrol, and he had shown an
interest in her, and had made his own impression, from the first. She answered
her brother that his demand of her was excessive in the absence of anything
she could recognise that she owed him. To this he replied that she might marry
then whom she liked, but that if she would give up her boy and send him home,
where he would take charge of him and bring him up to prospects she would be a
fool not to appreciate, there need be no more talk and she could lead her life
as she perversely preferred. This crisis came up during our winter with her
-- it was a very cruel one, and my mother, as I have said, was all in her
confidence."
  "Of course" -- Davey Bradham abounded; "and you were all in your mother's!"
  Rosanna leaned back on the bench, her cigarette between her strong and
rounded fingers; she sat at her ease now, this chapter of history filling,
under her view, the soft lap of space and the comfort of having it well out,
and yet of keeping it, as her [32] friend somehow helped her to do, well
within her control, more and more operative. "Well, I was sixteen years old,
and Gray at that time fourteen. I was huge and hideous and began then to enjoy
the advantage -- if advantage it was -- of its seeming so ridiculous to treat
the monster I had grown as negligible that I _had_ to be treated as important.
I wasn't a bit stupider than I am now -- in fact I saw things much more
sharply and simply and knew ever so much better what I wanted and didn't. Gray
and I had become excellent friends -- if you want to think of him as my 'first
passion' you are welcome to, unless you want to think of him rather as my
fifth! He was a charming little boy, much nicer than any I had ever seen; he
didn't come up higher than my shoulder, and, to tell you all, I remember how
once, in some game with a party of English and American children whom my
mother had got together for Christmas, I tried to be amusing by carrying
half-a-dozen of them successively on my back -- all in order to have the
pleasure of carrying _him_, whom I felt, I remember, but as a feather-weight
compared with most of the others. Such a romp was I -- as you can of course
see I must have been, and at the same time so horridly artful; which is
doubtless now not so easy for you to believe of me. But the point," Rosanna
developed, "is that I entered all the way into our friends' situation and that
when I was with my [33] mother alone we talked for the time of nothing else.
The strange, or at least the certain, thing was that though we should have
liked so to have them over here, we hated to see them hustled even by a rich
relative: we were rich ourselves, though we rather hated that too, and there
was no romance for us in being so stuffed up. We liked Mr Northover, their so
devoted friend, we saw how they cared for him, how even Graham did, and what
an interest he took in the boy, for whom we felt that a happy association with
him, each of them so open to it, would be a great thing; we threw ourselves
in short, and I dare say to extravagance, into the idea of the success of
Mr Northover's suit. She was the charmingest little woman, very pretty, very
lonely, very vague, but very sympathetic, and we perfectly understood that the
pleasant Englishman, of great taste and thoroughly a gentleman, should have
felt encouraged. We didn't in the least adore Mr Betterman, between whom
and my father the differences that afterwards became so bad were already
threatening, and when I saw for myself how the life that might thus be
opened to him where they were, with his mother's marriage and a further good
influence crowning it, would compare with the awful game of grab, to express
it mildly, for which I was sure his uncle proposed to train him, I took upon
myself to get more roused and wound-up than I had doubtless any real right to,
and [34] to wonder what I might really do to promote the benefit that struck
me as the greater and defeat the one against which my prejudice was strong."
  She had drawn up a moment as if what was to come required her to gather
herself, while her companion seemed to assure her by the backward set of his
head, that of a man drinking at a cool spout, how little his attention had
lapsed. "I see at once, you dear grand creature, that you were from that
moment at the bottom of everything that was to happen; and without knowing yet
what these things were I back you for it now up to the hilt."
  "Well," she said, "I'm much obliged, and you're never for an instant, mind,
to fail me; but I needed no backing then -- I didn't even need my mother's: I
took on myself so much from the moment my chance turned up."
  "You just walked in and settled the whole question, of course." He quite
flaunted the luxury of his interest. "Clearly what moved you _was_ one of
those crowning passions of infancy."
  "Then why didn't I want, on the contrary, to have him, poor boy, where his
presence would feed my flame?" Rosanna at once inquired. "Why didn't I obtain
of my mother to say to his -- for she would have said anything in the world I
wanted: 'You just quietly get married, don't disappoint this delightful man;
while we take Gray back to [35] his uncle, which will be awfully good for him,
and let him learn to make his fortune, the decent women that we are fondly
befriending him and you and your husband coming over whenever you like, to see
how beautifully it answers.' Why if I was so infatuated didn't I do _that_?"
she repeated.
  He kept her waiting not a moment. "Just because you _were_ so infatuated.
Just because when you're infatuated you're sublime." She had turned her eyes
on him, facing his gorgeous hospitality, but facing it with a visible flush.
"Rosanna Gaw" -- he took undisguised advantage of her -- "you're sublime now,
just as sublime as you can be, and it's what you want to be. You liked your
young man so much that you were really capable---!"
  He let it go at that, for even with his drop she had not completed his
sense. But the next thing, practically, she did so. "I've been capable ever
since -- that's the point: of feeling that I did act upon him, that, young and
accessible as I found him, I gave a turn to his life."
  "Well," Davey continued to comment, "he's not so young now, and no more,
naturally, are you; but I guess, all the same, you'll give many another." And
then, as facing him altogether more now, she seemed to ask how he could be
so sure: "Why, if _I'm_ so accessible, through my tough old hide, how is the
exquisite creature formed to all the sensibilities for which you sought to
[36] provide going in the least to hold out? He owes you clearly everything
he has become, and how can he decently not want you should know he feels it?
All's well that ends well: that at least I foresee I shall want to say when
I've had more of the beginning. You were going to tell me how it was in
particular that you got your pull."
  She puffed and puffed again, letting her eyes once more wander and rest;
after which, through her smoke, she recovered the sense of the past. "One
Sunday morning we went together to the great Gallery -- it had been between
us for weeks that he was some day to take me and show me the things he most
admired: that wasn't at all what would have been my line with _him_. The
extent to which he was 'cleverer' than I and knew about things I didn't, and
don't know even now---!" Greatly she made this point. "And yet the beauty was
that I felt there were ways I could help him, all the same -- I knew _that_
even with all the things I didn't know, so that they remained ignorances of
which I think I wasn't a bit ashamed: any more in fact than I am now, there
being too many things else to be ashamed of. Never so much as that day, at any
rate, had I felt ready for my part -- yes, it came to me there as my part; for
after he had called for me at our hotel and we had started together I knew
something particular was the matter and that he of a sudden didn't care for
what we were doing, though we [37] had planned it as a great occasion much
before; that in short his thoughts were elsewhere and that I could have made
out the trouble in his face if I hadn't wished not to seem to look for it. I
hated that he should have it, whatever it was -- just how I hated it comes
back to me as if from yesterday; and also how at the same time I pretended not
to notice, and he attempted not to show _he_ did, but to introduce me, in the
rooms, to what we had come for instead -- which gave us half-an-hour that I
recover vividly, recover, I assure you, quite painfully still, as a conscious,
solemn little farce. What put an end to it was that we at last wandered away
from the great things, the famous Madonna, the Correggio, the Paul Veroneses,
which he had quavered out the properest remarks about, and got off into a
small room of little Dutch and other later masters, things that didn't matter
and that we couldn't pretend to go into, but where the German sunshine of a
bright winter day came down through some upper light and played on all the
rich little old colour and old gilding after a fashion that of a sudden
decided me. 'I don't care a hang for anything!' I stood before him and boldly
spoke out: 'I haven't cared a hang since we came in, if you want to know -- I
care only for what you're worried about, and what must be pretty bad, since I
can see, if you don't mind my saying it, that it has made you cry at home.'"
[38]
  "He can hardly have thanked you for _that_!" Davey's competence threw off.
  "No, he didn't pretend to, and I had known he wouldn't; he hadn't to tell
me how a boy feels in taking such a charge from a girl. But there he was on
a small divan, swinging his legs a little and with his head -- he had taken
his hat off -- back against the top of the seat and the queerest look in his
flushed face. For a moment he stared hard, and _then_ at least, I said to
myself, his tears were coming up. They didn't come, however -- he only kept
glaring as in fever; from which I presently saw that I had said not a bit the
wrong thing, but exactly the very best. 'Oh if I were some good to you!' I
went on -- and with the sense the next moment, ever so happily, that that was
really what I _was_ being. 'She has put it upon me to choose for myself --
to think, to decide and to settle it that way for both of us. She has put it
_all_ upon me,' he said -- 'and how _can_ I choose, in such a difficulty,' he
asked, 'when she tells me, and when I believe, that she'll do exactly as I
say?' 'You mean your mother will marry Mr Northover or give him up according
as you prefer?' -- but of course I knew what he meant. It was a joy to me
to feel it clear up -- with the good I had already done him, at a touch, by
making him speak. I saw how this relieved him even when he practically spoke
of his question as too frightful for his young intelligence, his young
conscience [39] -- literally his young nerves. It was as if he had appealed
to me to pronounce it positively cruel -- while I had felt at the first word
that I really but blessed it. It wasn't too much for _my_ young nerves --
extraordinary as it may seem to you," Rosanna pursued, "that I should but have
wished to undertake at a jump such a very large order. I wonder now from where
my lucidity came, but just as I stood there I saw some things in a light in
which, even with still better opportunities, I've never so _much_ seen them
since. It was as if I took everything in -- and what everything meant; and,
flopped there on his seat and always staring up at me, he understood that I
was somehow inspired for him."
  "My dear child, you're inspired at this moment!" -- Davey Bradham rendered
the tribute. "It's too splendid to hear of amid our greedy wants, our timid
ideas and our fishy passions. You ring out like Br"unnhilde at the opera. How
jolly to have pronounced his doom!"
  "Yes," she gravely said, "and you see how jolly I now find it. I settled
it. I was fate," Rosanna puffed. "He recognised fate -- all the more that he
really wanted to; and you see therefore," she went on, "how it was to be in
every single thing that has happened since."
  "You stuck him fast there" -- Mr Bradham, filled in the picture. "Yet not so
fast after all," he understandingly added, "but that you've been [40] able to
handle him again as you like. He does in other words whatever you prescribe."
  "If he did it then I don't know what I should have done had he refused to
do it now. For now everything's changed. Everyone's dead or dying. And I
believe," she wound up, "that I was quite right then, that he has led his life
and been happy."
  "I see. If he hadn't been---!" Her companion's free glance ranged.
  "He would have had me to thank, yes. And at the best I should have cost him
much!"
  "Everything, you mean, that the old man had more or less from the first in
mind?"
  Davey had taken her up; but the next moment, without direct reply, she was
on her feet. "At any rate you see!" she said to finish with it.
  "Oh I see a lot! And if there's more in it than meets the eye I think I see
that too," her friend declared. "I want to see it all at any rate -- and just
as you've started it. But what I want most naturally is to see your little
darling himself."
  "Well, if I had been afraid of you I wouldn't have spoken. You won't hurt
him," Rosanna said as they got back to the cliff walk.
  "Hurt him? Why I shall be his great warning light -- or at least I shall
be yours, which is better still." To this, however, always pondering, she
answered nothing, but stood as if spent by her effort and half disposed in
consequence to retrace her steps; against which possibility he at once [41]
protested. "You don't mean you're not coming on?"
  She thought another instant; then her eyes overreached the long smooth
interval beyond which the nondescript excrescences of Gussy's 'cottage', vast
and florid, and in a kindred company of hunches and gables and pinnacles
confessed, even if in confused accents, to its monstrous identity. The sight
itself seemed after all to give her resolution. "Yes, now for Cissy!" she said
and braved the prospect.


                             -=-=-  3  -=-=-

Half-an-hour later, however, she still had this young lady before her in
extended perspective and as a satisfaction, if not as an embarrassment, to
come; thanks to the fact that Mrs Bradham had forty persons, or something like
it, though all casually turning up, at tea, and that she herself had perhaps
never been so struck with the activity of the charming girl's response to
the considerations familiar alike to all of them as Gussy's ideas about her.
Gussy's ideas about her, as about everything in the world, could on occasion
do more to fill the air of any scene over which Gussy presided than no matter
what vociferation of any massed crowd surrounding that lady: exactly which
truth might have been notable now to Rosanna in the light of Cissy's
occasional clear [42] smile at her, always as yet from a distance, during
lapses of intervals and across shifting barriers of the more or less eminent
and brilliant. Mrs Bradham's great idea -- notoriously the most disinterested
Gussy had been known, through a career rich in announced intentions and
glorious designs, to entertain with any coherence -- was that by placing and
keeping on exhibition, under her eye, the loveliest flower of girlhood a
splendid and confident society could have wished to wear on its bosom she
should at once signally enhance the dignity of the social part played by
herself and steep the precious object in a medium in which the care of
precious objects was supremely understood. "When she does so much for me what
in the world mustn't I do for _her_?" Cecilia Foy had put that to Rosanna
again and again with perfect lucidity, making her sense of fair play shine
out of it and her cultivation of that ideal form perhaps not the least of
the complications under which our elder young woman, earnest in everything,
endeavoured to stick to the just view of her. Cissy had from the first
appealed to her with restrictions, but that was the way in which for poor
brooding Rosanna every one appealed; only there was in the present case the
difference that whereas in most cases the appeal, or rather her view of it,
found itself somehow smothered in the attendant wrong possibilities, the
interest of this bright victim of Mrs Bradham's furtherance worked [43]
clearer, on the whole, with the closer, with the closest, relation, never
starting the questions one might entertain about her except to dispose of
them, even if when they had been disposed of she mostly started them again.
  Not often had so big a one at all events been started for Rosanna as when
she saw the girl earn her keep, as they had so often called it together, by
multiplying herself for everyone else about the place instead of remaining as
single and possessable as her anxious friend had come over to invite her to
be. Present to this observer to the last point indeed, and yet as nothing new,
was the impression of that insolence of ease on Gussy's part which was never
so great as when her sense for any relation was least fine and least true.
She was naturally never so the vulgar rich woman able to afford herself all
luxuries as when she was most stupid about the right enjoyment of these and
most brutally systematic, as Rosanna's inward voice phrased the matter, for
some inferior and desecrating use of them. Mrs Bradham would deeply have
resented -- as deeply as a woman might who had no depth -- any imputation on
her view of what would be fine and great for her young friend, but Rosanna's
envy and admiration of possibilities, to say nothing of actualities, to which
this view was quite blind, kept the girl before her at times as a sacrificed,
truly an even prostituted creature; who yet also, it had to be added, could
often [44] alienate sympathy by strange, by perverse concurrences. However,
Rosanna thought, Cissy wasn't in concurrence now, but was quite otherwise
preoccupied than with what their hostess could either give her or take from
her. She was happy -- this our young woman perfectly perceived, to her own
very great increase of interest; so happy that, as had been repeatedly
noticeable before, she multiplied herself through the very agitation of it,
appearing to be, for particular things they had to say to her, particular
conversational grabs and snatches, all of the most violent, they kept
attempting and mostly achieving, at the service of everyone at once, and
thereby as obliging, as humane a beauty, after the fashion of the old term, as
could have charmed the sight. What Rosanna most noted withal, and not for the
first time either, every observation she had hitherto made seeming now but
intensified, what she most noted was the huge general familiarity, the pitch
of intimacy unmodulated, as if exactly the same tie, from person to person,
bound the whole company together and nobody had anything to say to anyone that
wasn't equally in question for all.
  This, she knew, was the air and the sound, the common state, of intimacy,
and again and again, in taking it in, she had remained unsure of whether it
left her more hopelessly jealous or more rudely independent. She would have
liked to be intimate -- with someone or other, not indeed with every [45]
member of a crowd; but the faculty, as appeared, hadn't been given her (for
with whom had she ever exercised it? not even with Cissy, she felt now) and it
was ground on which she knew alternate languor and relief. The fact, however,
that so much as all this could be present to her while she encountered
greetings, accepted tea, and failed of felicity before forms of address for
the most part so hilarious, or at least so ingenious, as to remind her further
that she might never expect to be funny either -- that fact might have shown
her as hugging a treasure of consciousness rather than as seeking a soil for
its interment. What they all took for granted! -- this again and again had
been before her; and never so as when Gussy Bradham after a little became
possessed of her to the extent of their sharing a settee in one of the great
porches on the lawny margin of which, before sundry overarchings in other
and quite contradictious architectural interests began to spread, a dozen
dispersed couples and trios revolved and lingered in sight. How was _he_, the
young man at the other house, going to like these enormous assumptions? --
that of a sudden oddly came to her; so far indeed as it was odd that Gussy
should suggest such questions. She suggested questions in her own way at all
times; Rosanna indeed mostly saw her in a sort of immodest glare of such, the
chief being doubtless the wonder, never assuaged, of how any circle of the
supposed amenities could [46] go on 'putting up' with her. The present was as
a fact perhaps the first time our young woman had seen her in the light of a
danger to herself. If society, or what they called such, had to reckon with
her and accepted the charge, that was society's own affair -- it appeared
on the whole to understand its interest; but why should she, Rosanna Gaw,
recognise a complication she had done nothing ever to provoke? It was
literally as if the reckoning sat there between them and all the terms they
had ever made with felt differences, intensities of separation and opposition,
had now been superseded by the need for fresh ones -- forms of contact and
exchange, forms of pretended intercourse, to be improvised in presence of new
truths.
  So it was at any rate that Rosanna's imagination worked while she asked
herself if there mightn't be something in an idea she had more than once
austerely harboured -- the possibility that Mrs Bradham could on occasion be
afraid of her. If this lady's great note was that of an astounding assurance
based on approved impunity, how, certainly, should a plain dull shy spinster,
with an entire incapacity for boldness and a perfect horror, in general, of
intermeddling, have broken the spell? -- especially as there was no other
person in the world, not one, whom she could have dreamed of wishing to put in
fear. Deep was the discomfort for Miss Gaw of losing with her entertainer the
commonest advantage she perhaps knew, that of [47] her habit of escape from
the relation of dislike, let alone of hostility, through some active denial
for the time of any relation at all. What was there in Gussy that rendered
impossible to Rosanna's sense this very vulgarest of luxuries? She gave her
always the impression of looking at her with an exaggeration of ease, a
guarded penetration, that consciously betrayed itself; though how could one
know, after all, that this wasn't the horrid nature of her look for everyone?
-- which would have been publicly denounced if people hadn't been too much
involved with her to be candid. With her wondrous bloom of life and health and
her hard confidence that had nothing to do with sympathy, Gussy might have
presented it as a matter of some pusillanimity, her present critic at the same
time felt, that one should but detect the displeasing in such an exhibition of
bright activity. The only way not to stand off from her, no doubt, was to be
of her 'bossed' party and crew, or in other words to be like everyone else;
and perhaps one might on that condition have enjoyed as a work of nature or
even of art, an example of all-efficient force, her braveries of aspect and
attitude, resources of resistance to time and thought, things not of beauty,
for some unyielding reason, and quite as little of dignity, but things of
assertion and application in an extraordinary degree, things of a straight
cold radiance [48] and of an emphasis that was like the stamp of hard flat
feet. Even if she was to be envied it would be across such gulfs; as it was
indeed one couldn't so much as envy her the prodigy of her 'figure', which had
been at eighteen, as one had heard, that of a woman of forty and was now at
forty, one saw, that of a girl of eighteen: such a state of the person wasn't
human, to the younger woman's sombre sense, but might have been that of some
shining humming insect, a thing of the long-constricted waist, the minimised
yet caparisoned head, the fixed disproportionate eye and tough transparent
wing, gossamer guaranteed. With all of which, however, she had pushed through
every partition and was in the centre of her guest's innermost preserve before
she had been heard coming.
  "It's too lovely that you should have got him to do what he ought -- that
dreadful old man! But I don't know if you feel how interesting it's all going
to be; in fact if you know yourself how wonderful it is that he has already --
Mr Fielder has, I mean -- such a tremendous friend in Cissy."
  Rosanna waited, facing her, noting her extraordinary perfections of
neatness, of elegance, of arrangement, of which it couldn't be said whether
they most handed over to you, as on some polished salver, the clear truth of
her essential commonness or transposed it into an element that could please,
that could even fascinate, as a supreme attestation [49] of care. 'Take her as
an advertisement of all the latest knowledges of how to "treat" every inch of
the human surface and where to "get" every scrap of the personal envelope, so
far as she _is_ enveloped, and she does achieve an effect sublime in itself
and thereby absolute in a wavering world' -- with so much even as that was
Miss Gaw aware of helping to fill for her own use the interval before she
spoke. "No," she said, "I know nothing of what any of you may suppose
yourselves to know." After which, however, with a sudden inspiration, a quick
shift of thought as through catching an alarm, "I haven't seen Mr Fielder for
a very long time, haven't seen him at all yet here," she added; "but though I
hoped immensely he would come, and am awfully glad he has, what I want for him
is to have the very best time he possibly can; a much better one than I shall
myself at all know how to help him to."
  "Why, aren't you helping him to the greatest time he can have _ever_ had
if you've waked up his uncle to a sense of decency?" Gussy demanded with her
brightest promptness. "You needn't think, Rosanna," she proceeded with a
well-nigh fantastic development of that ease, "you needn't think you're going
to be able to dodge the least little consequence of your having been so
wonderful. He's just going to owe you everything, and to follow that feeling
up; so I don't see why you shouldn't want to let him -- it would be so mean
[50] of him not to! -- or be deprived of the credit of so good a turn. When I
do things" -- Gussy always had every account of herself ready -- "I want to
have them recognised; I like to make them pay, without the least shame, in the
way of glory gained. However, it's between yourselves," her delicacy conceded,
"and how can one judge -- except just to envy you such a lovely relation? All
I want is that you should feel that here we are if you do want help. He should
have here the best there is, and should have it, don't you think? before
he tumbles from ignorance into any mistake -- mistakes have such a way of
sticking. So don't be unselfish about him, don't sacrifice him to the fear of
using your advantage: what are such advantages as you enjoy meant for -- all
of them, I mean -- but to be used up to the limit? You'll see at any rate what
Cissy says -- she has great ideas about him. I mean," said Mrs Bradham with a
qualification in which the expression of Rosanna's still gaze suddenly seemed
reflected, "I mean that it's so interesting she should have all the clues."
  Rosanna still gazed; she might even after a little have struck a watcher as
held in spite of herself by some heavy spell. It was an old sense -- she had
already often had it: when once Gussy had got her head up, got away and away
as Davey called it, she might appear to do what she would with her victim;
appear, that is, to [51] Gussy herself -- the appearance never corresponded
for Miss Gaw to an admission of her own. Behind the appearance, at all events,
things on one side and the other piled themselves up, and Rosanna certainly
knew what they were on her side. Nevertheless it was as a vocal note too
faintly quavered through some loud orchestral sound that she heard herself
echo: "The clues---?"
  "Why, it's so funny there should be such a lot -- and all gathered about
here!" To this attestation of how everything in the world, for that matter,
was gathered right there Rosanna felt herself superficially yield; and even
before she knew what was coming -- for something clearly was -- she was
strangely conscious of a choice somehow involved in her attitude and dependent
on her mind, and this too as at almost the acutest moment of her life. What it
came to, with the presentiment of forces at play such as she had really never
yet had to count with, was the question, all for herself, of whether she
should be patently lying in the profession of a readiness to hand the subject
of her interest over unreservedly to all waiting, all so remarkably gathering
contacts and chances, or whether the act wouldn't partake of the very finest
strain of her past sincerity. She was to remember the moment later on as
if she had really by her definition, by her selection, 'behaved' -- fairly
feeling the breath of her young man's [52] experience on her cheek before
knowing with the least particularity what it would most be, and deciding then
and there to swallow down every fear of any cost of anything to herself. She
felt extraordinarily in the presence of symptoms, symptoms of life, of death,
of danger, of delight, of what did she know? But this it was exactly that cast
derision, by contrast, on such poor obscurities as her feelings, and settled
it for her that when she had professed a few minutes back that she hoped they
would all, for his possible pleasure in it, catch him up and, so far as they
might, make him theirs, she wasn't to have spoken with false frankness. Queer
enough at the same time, and a wondrous sign of her state of sensibility,
that she should see symptoms glimmer from so very far off. What was this one
that was already in the air before Mrs Bradham had so much as answered her
question?
  Well, the next moment at any rate she knew, and more extraordinary then than
anything was the spread of her apprehension, off somehow to the incalculable,
under Gussy's mention of a name. What did this show most of all, however, but
how little the intensity of her private association with the name had even yet
died out, or at least how vividly it could revive in a connection by which
everything in her was quickened? 'Haughty' Vint, just lately conversed with by
Cissy in New York, it appeared, and now coming on to the [53] Bradhams from
one day to another, had fed the girl with information, it also, and more
wonderfully, transpired -- information about Gray's young past, all
surprisingly founded on close contacts, the most interesting, between the
pair, as well as the least suspected ever by Rosanna: to such an effect that
the transmitted trickle of it had after a moment swelled from Gussy's lips
into a stream by which our friend's consciousness was flooded. 'Clues'
these connections might well be called when every touch could now set up a
vibration. It hummed away at once like a pressed button -- if she had been
really and in the least meanly afraid of complications she might now have sat
staring at one that would do for oddity, for the oddity of that relation of
her own with Cissy's source of anecdote which could so have come and gone and
yet thrown no light for her on anything but itself; little enough, by what
she had tried to make of it at the time, though that might have been. It had
meanwhile scarce revived for her otherwise, even if reviving now, as we have
said, to intensity, that Horton Vint's invitation to her some three years
before to bestow her hand upon him in marriage had been attended by
impressions as singular perhaps as had ever marked a like case in an equal
absence of outward show. The connection with him remaining for her had simply
been that no young man -- in the clear American social air -- had probably
ever approached a young [54] woman on such ground with so utter a lack of
ostensible warrant and had yet at the same time so saved the situation for
himself, or for what he might have called his dignity, and even hers; to the
positive point of his having left her with the mystery, in all the world, that
she could still most pull out from old dim confusions to wonder about, and
wonder all in vain, when she had nothing better to do. Everything was over
between them save the fact that they hadn't quarrelled, hadn't indeed so much
as discussed; but here withal was association, association unquenched -- from
the moment a fresh breath, as just now, could blow upon it. He had had the
appearance -- it was unmistakeable -- of absolutely believing she might accept
him if he but put it to her lucidly enough and let her look at him straight
enough; and the extraordinary thing was that, for all her sense of this at the
hour, she hadn't imputed to him a real fatuity.
  It had remained with her that, given certain other facts, no incident of
that order could well have had so little to confess by any of its aspects to
the taint of vulgarity. She had seen it, she believed, as he meant it, meant
it with entire conviction: he had intended a tribute, of a high order, to her
intelligence, which he had counted on, or at least faced with the opportunity,
to recognise him as a greater value, taken all round, appraised by the _whole_
[55] suitability, than she was likely ever again to find offered. He was of
course to take or to leave, and she saw him stand there in that light as he
had then stood, not pleading, not pressing, not pretending to anything but
the wish and the capacity to serve, only holding out her chance, appealing to
her judgment, inviting her inspection, meeting it without either a shade of
ambiguity or, so far as she could see, any vanity beyond the facts. It had all
been wonderful enough, and not least so that, although absolutely untouched
and untempted, perfectly lucid on her own side and perfectly inaccessible, she
had in a manner admired him, in a manner almost enjoyed him, in the act of
denying him hope. Extraordinary in especial had it been that he was probably
right, right about his value, right about his rectitude, of conscious
intention at least, right even as to his general calculation of effect, an
effect probably producible on most women; right finally in judging that should
he strike at all this would be the one way. It was only less extraordinary
that no faintest shade of regret, no lightest play of rueful imagination, no
subordinate stir of pity or wonder, had attended her memory of having left
him to the mere cold comfort of reflection. It was his truth that had fallen
short, not his error; the soundness, as it were, of his claim -- so far as his
fine intelligence, matching her own, that is, could make it sound -- had had
nothing to do with its propriety. She had [56] refused him, none the less,
without disliking him, at the same time that she was at no moment afterwards
conscious of having cared whether he had suffered. She had been too unaware of
the question even to remark that she seemed indifferent; though with a vague
impression -- so far as that went -- that suffering was not in his chords. His
acceptance of his check she could but call inscrutably splendid -- inscrutably
perhaps because she couldn't quite feel that it had left nothing between them.
Something there was, something there had to be, if only the marvel, so to say,
of her present, her permanent, backward vision of the force with which they
had touched and separated. It stuck to her somehow that they had touched still
more than if they had loved, held each other still closer than if they had
embraced: to such and so strange a tune had they been briefly intimate. Would
any man ever look at her so for passion as Mr Vint had looked for reason? and
should her own eyes ever again so visit a man's depths and gaze about in them
unashamed to a tune to match that adventure? Literally what they had said was
comparatively unimportant -- once he had made his errand clear; whereby the
rest might all have been but his silent exhibition of his personality, so to
name it, his honour, his assumption, his situation, his life, and that failure
on her own part to yield an inch which had but the more let him see how
straight these things broke upon her. [57] For all the straightness, it was
true, the fact that might most have affected, not to say concerned, her had
remained the least expressed. It wasn't for her now to know what difference
it could have made that he was in relation with Gray Fielder; incontestably,
however, _their_ relation, or their missing of one, hers and Haughty's,
flushed anew in the sudden light.
  "Oh I'm so glad he has good friends here then -- with such a clever one as
Mr Vint we can certainly be easy about him." So much Rosanna heard herself
at last say, and it would doubtless have quite served for assent to Gussy's
revelation without the further support given her by the simultaneous
convergence upon them of various members of the party, who exactly struck our
young woman as having guessed, by the sight of hostess and momentous guest
withdrawn together, that the topic of the moment was there to be plucked from
their hands. Rosanna was now on her feet -- she couldn't sit longer and just
take things; and she was to ask herself afterwards with what cold stare of
denial she mightn't have appeared quite unprecedentedly to face the inquiring
rout under the sense that now certainly, if she didn't take care, she should
have nothing left of her own. It wasn't that they weren't, all laughter and
shimmer, all senseless sound and expensive futility, the easiest people in the
world to share with, and several the very prettiest and pleasantest, of the
vaguest [58] insistence after all, the most absurdly small awareness of what
they were eager about; but that of the three or four things then taking place
at once the brush across her heart of Gray's possible immediate question,
"Have you brought me over then to live with _these_---?" had most in common
with alarm. It positively helped her indeed withal that she found herself, the
next thing, greeting with more sincerity of expression than she had, by her
consciousness, yet used Mrs Bradham's final leap to action in the form of "I
want him to dinner of course right off!" She said it with the big brave laugh
that represented her main mercy for the general public view of her native
eagerness, an eagerness appraised, not to say proclaimed, by herself as a
passion for the service of society, and in connection with which it was mostly
agreed that she never so drove her flock before her as when paying this
theoretic tribute to grace of manner. Before Rosanna could ejaculate, moved
though she was to do so, the question had been taken up by the extremely
pretty person who was known to her friends, and known even to Rosanna, as
Minnie Undle and who at once put in a plea for Mr Fielder's presence that
evening, her own having been secured for it. Before such a rate of procedure
as this evocation implied even Gussy appeared to recoil, but with a prompt
proviso in favour of the gentleman's figuring rather on the [59] morrow,
when Mrs Undle, since she seemed so impatient, might again be of the party.
Mrs Undle agreed on the spot, though by this time Rosanna's challenge had
ceased to hang fire. "But do you really consider that you _know_ him so much
as that?" -- she let Gussy have it straight, even if at the disadvantage that
there were now as ever plenty of people to react, to the last hilarity, at the
idea that acquaintance enjoyed on either side was needfully imputable to these
participations. "That's just why -- if we don't know him!" Mrs Undle further
contributed; while Gussy declined recognition of the relevance of any word
of Miss Gaw's. She declined it indeed in her own way, by a yet stiffer
illustration of her general resilience; an "Of course I mean, dear, that I
look to you to bring him!" expressing sufficiently her system.
  "Then you really expect him when his uncle's dying---?" sprang in all
honesty from Rosanna's lips; to be taken up on the instant, however, by a
voice that was not Gussy's and that rang clear before Gussy could speak.
  "There can't be the least question of it -- even if we're dying ourselves,
or even if I am at least!" was what Rosanna heard; with Cissy Foy, of a sudden
supremely exhibited, giving the case at once all happy sense, all bright
quick harmony with their general immediate interest. She pressed to Rosanna
straight, as if nothing as yet had had time to pass between them -- which
very little [60] in fact had; with the result for our young woman of feeling
helped, by the lightest of turns, not to be awkward herself, or really, what
came to the same thing, not to be anything herself. It was a fine perception
she had had before -- of how Cissy could on occasion 'do' for one, and this,
all extraordinarily and in a sort of double sense, by quenching one in her
light at the very moment she offered it for guidance. She quenched Gussy,
she was the single person who could, Gussy almost gruntingly consenting; she
quenched Minnie Undle, she cheapened every other presence, scattering lovely
looks, multiplying happy touches, grasping Rosanna for possession, yet at the
same time, as with her free hand, waving away every other connection: so that
a minute or two later -- for it scarce seemed more -- the pair were isolated,
still on the verandah somewhere, but intensely confronted and talking at ease,
or in a way that had to pass for ease, with its not mattering at all whether
their companions, dazzled and wafted off, had dispersed and ceased to be, or
whether they themselves had simply been floated to where they wished on the
great surge of the girl's grace. The girl's grace was, after its manner, such
a force that Miss Gaw had had repeatedly, on past occasions, to doubt even
while she recognised -- for _could_ a young creature you weren't quite sure of
use a weapon of such an edge only for good? The young creature seemed at any
rate now as never yet to [61] give out its play for a thing to be counted on
and trusted; and with Gussy Bradham herself shown just there behind them as
letting it take everything straight out of _her_ hands, nobody else at all
daring to touch, what were you to do but verily feel distinguished by its so
wrapping you about? The only sharpness in what had happened was that with
Cissy's act of presence Mrs Bradham had exercised her great function of social
appraiser by staring and then, as under conclusions drawn from it, giving way.
One might have found it redeemingly soft in her that before this particular
suggestion she _could_ melt, or that in other words Cissy appeared the single
fact in all the world about which she had anything to call imagination. She
imagined her, she imagined her _now_, and as dealing somehow with their
massive friend; which consciousness, on the latter's part, it must be said,
played for the moment through everything else.
  Not indeed that there wasn't plenty for the girl to fill the fancy with;
since nothing could have been purer than the stream that she poured into
Rosanna's as from an upturned crystal urn while she repeated over, holding her
by the two hands, gazing at her in admiration: "I can _see_ how you care for
him -- I can see, I can see!" And she felt indeed, our young woman, how the
cover was by this light hand whisked off her secret -- Cissy made it somehow
a secret in the act of laying it bare; and that she blushed for the felt [62]
exposure as even Gussy had failed to make her. Seeing which her companion but
tilted the further vessel of confidence. "It's too funny, it's too wonderful
that I too should know something. But I do, and I'll tell you how -- not now,
for I haven't time, but as soon as ever I can; which will make you see. So
what you must do for all you're worth," said Cissy, "is to care now more than
ever. You must keep him from us, because we're not good enough and you _are_;
you must act in the sense of what you feel, and must feel exactly as you've a
right to -- for, as I say, I know, I know!"
  It was impossible, Rosanna seemed to see, that a generous young thing should
shine out in more beauty; so that what in the world might one ever keep from
her? Surpassingly strange the plea thus radiant on the very brow of the
danger! "You mean you know Mr Fielder's history? from your having met
somebody---?"
  "Oh that of course, yes; Gussy, whom I've told of my having met
Mr Northover, will have told you. That's curious and charming," Cissy went on,
"and I want awfully we should talk of it. But it isn't what I mean by what I
know -- and what you don't, my dear thing!"
  Rosanna couldn't have told why, but she had begun to tremble, and also to
try not to show it. "What I don't know -- about Gray Fielder? Why, of course
there's plenty!" she smiled. [63]
  Cissy still held her hands; but Cissy now was grave. "No, there isn't plenty
-- save so far as what I mean is enough. And I haven't told it to Gussy. It's
too good for her," the girl added. "It's too good for any one but you."
  Rosanna just waited, feeling herself perhaps grimace. "What, Cissy, _are_
you talking about?"
  "About what I heard from Mr Northover when we met him, when we saw so much
of him, three years ago at Ragatz, where we had gone for Mamma and where we
went through the cure with him. He and I struck up a friendship and he often
spoke to me of his stepson -- who wasn't there with him, was at that time off
somewhere in the mountains or in Italy, I forget, but to whom I could see
he was devoted. He and I hit it off beautifully together -- he seemed to
me awfully charming and to like to tell me things. So what I allude to is
something he said to me."
  "About me?" Rosanna gasped.
  "Yes -- I see now it was about you. But it's only to-day that I've guessed
that. Otherwise, otherwise---!" And as if under the weight of her great
disclosure Cissy faltered.
  But she had now indeed made her friend desire it. "You mean that otherwise
you'd have told me before?"
  "Yes indeed -- and it's such a miracle I didn't. It's such a miracle," said
Cissy, "that the person should all this time have been you -- or you have [64]
been the person. Of course I had no idea that all _this_ -- everything that
has taken place now, by what I understand -- was going so extraordinarily to
happen. You see he never named Mr Betterman, or in fact, I think," the girl
explained, "told me anything about him. And he didn't name, either, Gray's
friend -- so that in spite of the impression made on me you've never till
to-day been identified."
  Immense, as she went, Rosanna felt, the number of things she gave her thus
together to think about. What was coming she clearly needn't fear -- might
indeed, deep within, happily hold her breath for; but the very interest
somehow made her rest an instant, as for refinement of suspense, on the minor
surprises. "The impression then has been so great that you call him 'Gray'?"
  The girl at this ceased holding hands; she folded her arms back together
across her slim young person -- the frequent habit of it in her was of
the prettiest 'quaint' effect; she laughed as if submitting to some just
correction of a freedom. "Oh, but my dear, _he_ did, the delightful man -- and
isn't it borne in upon me that you do? Of course the impression was great
-- and if Mr Northover and I had met younger I don't know," her laugh said,
"what mightn't have happened. No, I never shall have had a greater, a more
intelligent admirer! As it was we remained true, secretly true, for fond
memory, to the end: at least I did, [65] though ever so secretly -- you see I
speak of it only now -- and I want to believe so in _his_ impression. But how
I torment you!" she suddenly said in another tone.
  Rosanna, nursing her patience, had a sad slow headshake. "I don't
understand."
  "Of course you don't -- and yet it's too beautiful. It was about Gray --
once when we talked of him, as I've told you we repeatedly did. It was that he
never would look at anyone else."
  Our friend could but appear at least to cast about. "Anyone else than whom?"
  "Why than you," Cissy smiled. "The girl he had loved in boyhood. The
American girl who, years before, in Dresden, had done for him something he
could never forget."
  "And what had she done?" stared Rosanna.
  "Oh he didn't tell me _that_! But if you don't take great care, as I say,"
Cissy went on, "perhaps _he_ may -- I mean Mr Fielder himself may when we
close round him in the way that, in your place, as I assure you, I would
certainly do everything to prevent."
  Rosanna looked about as with a sudden sense of weakness, the effect of
overstrain; it was absurd, but these last minutes might almost, with their
queer action, and as to the ground they covered, have been as many formidable
days. A fine verandah settee again close at hand offered her support, and she
dropped upon it, as for large retrieval of [66] menaced ease, with a need
she herself alone could measure. The need was to recover some sense of
perspective, to be able to place her young friend's somehow portentous assault
off in such conditions, if only of mere space and time, as would make for some
greater convenience of relation with it. It did at once help her -- and really
even for the tone in which she smiled across: "So you're sure?"
  Cissy hovered, shining, shifting, yet accepting the perspective as it were
-- when in the world had she to fear _any_? -- and positively painted there in
bright contradiction, her very grace again, after the odd fashion in which it
sometimes worked, seeming to deny her sincerity, and her very candour seeming
to deny her gravity. "Sure of what? Sure I'm right about you?"
  Rosanna took a minute to say -- so many things worked in her; yet when one
of these came uppermost, pushing certain of the others back, she found for
putting it forward a tone grateful to her own ear. This tone represented on
her part too a substitute for sincerity, but that was exactly what she wanted.
"I don't care a fig for any anecdote about myself -- which moreover it would
be very difficult for you to have right. What I ask you if you're certain of
is your being really not fit for him. Are you absolutely," said Miss Gaw, "as
bad as that?"
  The girl, placed before her, looked at her now, with raised hands folded
together, as if she had [67] been some seated idol, a great Buddha perched up
on a shrine. "Oh Rosanna, Rosanna---!" she admiringly, piously breathed.
  But it was not such treatment that could keep Miss Gaw from completing her
chosen sense. "I should be extremely sorry -- so far as I claim any influence
on him -- to interfere against his getting over here whatever impressions he
may; interfere by his taking you for more important, in any way, than seems
really called for."
  "Taking _me_?" Cissy smiled.
  "Taking any of you -- the people, in general and in particular, who haunt
this house. We mustn't be afraid for him of his having the interest, or even
the mere amusement, of learning all that's to be learnt about us."
  "Oh Rosanna, Rosanna" -- the girl kept it up -- "how you adore him; and how
you make me therefore, wretch that I am, fiendishly want to see him!"
  But it might quite have glanced now from our friend's idol surface. "You're
the best of us, no doubt -- very much; and I immensely hope you'll like him,
since you've been so extraordinarily prepared. It's to be supposed too that
he'll have some sense of his own."
  Cissy continued rapt. "Oh but you're deep -- deep deep deep!"
  It came out as another presence again, that of Davey Bradham, who had the
air of rather restlessly looking for her, emerged from one of the [68] long
windows of the house, just at hand, to meet Rosanna's eyes. She found herself
glad to have him back, as if further to inform him. Wasn't it after all rather
he that was the best of them and by no means Cissy? Her face might at any rate
have conveyed as much while she reported of that young lady. "She thinks me so
deep."
  It made the girl, who had not seen him, turn round; but with an immediate
equal confidence. "And _she_ thinks _me_, Davey, so good!"
  Davey's eyes were only on Cissy, but Rosanna seemed to feel them on herself.
"How you must have got mixed!" he exclaimed. "But your father has come for
you," he then said to Rosanna, who had got up.
  "Father has walked it?" -- she was amazed.
  "No, he's there in a hack to take you home -- and too excited to come in."
  Rosanna's surprise but grew. "Has anything happened---?"
  "Wonders -- I asked them. Mr Betterman's sitting right up."
  "Really improving---?" Then her mystification spread. "'Them', you say?"
  "Why his nurse, as I at least suppose her," said Davey, "is with him --
apparently to give you the expert opinion."
  "Of the fiend's recuperating?" Cissy cried with a wail. And then before her
friend's bewilderment, "How dreadfully horrid!" she added. [69]
  "Whose nurse, please?" Rosanna asked of Davey.
  "Why, hasn't he got a nurse?" Davey himself, as always, but desired
lucidity. "She's doing her duty by him all the same!"
  On which Cissy's young wit at once apprehended. "It's one of Mr Betterman's
taking a joy-ride in honour of his recovery! Did you ever hear anything so
cool?"
  She had appealed to her friends alike, but Rosanna, under the force of her
suggestion, was already in advance. "Then father himself must be ill!" Miss
Gaw had declared, moving rapidly to the quarter in which he so incongruously
waited and leaving Davey to point a rapid moral for Cissy's benefit while this
couple followed.
  "If he _is_ so upset that he hasn't been trusted alone I'll be hanged if I
don't just see it!"
  But the marvel was the way in which after an instant Cissy saw it too. "You
mean because he can't stand Mr Betterman's perhaps not dying?"
  "Yes, dear ingenuous child -- he has wanted so to see him out."
  "Well then, isn't it what we're all wanting?"
  "Most undoubtedly, pure pearl of penetration!" Davey returned as they went.
"His pick-up _will_ be a sell," he ruefully added; "even though it mayn't
quite kill anyone of us but Mr Gaw!"


                          B O O K   S E C O N D

[70]
                             -=-=-  1  -=-=-

Graham's view of his case and of all his proprieties, from the moment of
his arrival, was that he should hold himself without reserve at his uncle's
immediate disposition, and even such talk as seemed indicated, during the
forenoon, with Doctor Hatch and Miss Mumby, the nurse then in charge, did
little to lighten for him the immense prescription of delicacy. What he learnt
was far from disconcerting; the patient, aware of his presence, had shown for
soothed, not for agitated; the drop of the tension of waiting had had the
benign effect; he had repeated over to his attendant that now 'the boy' was
there, all would be for the best, and had asked also with soft iteration if he
were having everything he wanted. The happy assurance of this right turn of
their affair, so far as they had got, he was now quietly to enjoy: he was to
rest two or three hours, and if possible to sleep, while Graham, on his side,
sought a like remedy -- after the full indulgence in which their meeting would
[71] take place. The excellent fact for 'the boy', who was two-and-thirty
years of age and who now quite felt as if during the last few weeks he had
lived through a dozen more, was thus that he was doing his uncle good and that
somehow, to complete that harmony, he might feel the operation of an equal
virtue. At his invitation, at his decision, the idea of some such wondrous
matter as this had of course presided -- for waiting and obliging good, which
one was simply to open one's heart or one's hand to, had struck him ever as
so little of the common stuff of life that now, at closer range, it could
but figure as still more prodigious. At the same time there was nothing he
dreaded, by his very nature, more than a fond fatuity, and he had imposed on
himself from the first to proceed at every step as if without consideration
he might well be made an ass of. It was true that even such a danger as this
presented its interest -- the process to which he should yield would be
without precedent for him, and his imagination, thank heaven, had curiosity in
a large measure for its principle; he wouldn't rush into peril, however, and
flattered himself that after all he should not recognise its symptoms too
late.
  What he said to himself just now on the spot was, at any rate, that he
should probably have been more excited if he hadn't been so amused. To be
amused to a high pitch while his nearest kinsman, apparently nursing, as he
had been told, [72] a benevolence, lay dying a few rooms off -- let this
impute levity to our young man only till we understand that his liability to
recreation represented in him a function serious indeed. Everything played
before him, everything his senses embraced; and since his landing in New York
on the morning before this the play had been of a delightful violence. No
slightest aspect or briefest moment of it but had held and, so to say,
rewarded him: if he had come back at last for impressions, for emotions, for
the sake of the rush upon him of the characteristic, these things he was
getting in a measure beyond his dream. It was still beyond his dream that what
everything merely seen from the window of his room meant to him during these
first hours should move him first to a smile of such ecstasy, and then to
such an inward consumption of his smile, as might have made of happiness a
substance you could sweetly put under your tongue. He recognised -- that was
the secret, recognised wherever he looked -- and knew that when, from far
back, during his stretch of unbroken absence, he had still felt, and liked to
feel, what air had originally breathed upon him, these piercing intensities of
salience had really peopled the vision. He had much less remembered the actual
than forecast the inevitable, and the huge involved necessity of its all
showing as he found it seemed fairly to shout in his ear. He had brought with
him a fine intention, one of the finest of which he was capable, [73] and
wasn't it, he put to himself, already working? Wasn't he gathering in a
perfect bloom of freshness the fruit of his design rather to welcome the
impression to extravagance, if need be, than to undervalue it by the breadth
of a hair? Inexpert he couldn't help being, but too estranged to melt again
at whatever touch might make him, _that_ he'd be hanged if he couldn't help,
since what was the great thing again but to hold up one's face to _any_
drizzle of light?
  There it was, the light, in a mist of silver, even as he took in the
testimony of his cool bedimmed room, where the air was toned by the closing of
the great green shutters. It was ample and elegant, of an American elegance,
which was so unlike any other, and so still more unlike any lapse of it, ever
met by him, that some of its material terms and items held him as in rapt
contemplation; what he had wanted, even to intensity, being that things should
prove different, should positively glare with opposition -- there would be no
fun at all were they only imperfectly like, as that wouldn't in the least mean
character. Their character might be if it would in their consistently having
none -- than which deficiency nothing was more possible; but he should have to
decline to be charmed by unsuccessful attempts at sorts of expression he had
elsewhere known more or less happily achieved. This particular disappointment
indeed he was clearly not in for, since what could at once be more [74]
interesting than thus to note that the range and scale kept all their parts
together, that each object or effect disowned connections, as he at least had
all his life felt connections, and that his cherished hope of the fresh start
and the broken link would have its measure filled to the brim. There was an
American way for a room to be a room, a table a table, a chair a chair and a
book a book -- let alone a picture on a wall a picture, and a cold gush of
water in a bath of a hot morning a promise of purification; and of this
license all about him, in fine, he beheld the refreshing riot.
  It cast on him for the time a spell; he moved about with soft steps and long
pauses, staring out between the slats of the shutters, which he gently worked
by their attachment, and then again living, with a subtlety of sense that it
was a pleasure to exercise, into the conditions represented by whatever more
nearly pressed. It was not only that the process of assimilation, unlike any
other he had yet been engaged in, might stop short, to disaster, if he so much
as breathed too hard; but that if he made the sufficient surrender he might
absolutely himself be assimilated -- and that was truly an experience he
couldn't but want to have. The great thing he held on to withal was a decent
delicacy, a dread of appearing even to himself to take big things for granted.
This of itself was restrictive as to freedoms -- it stayed familiarities, it
kept uncertainty cool; for after all what had [75] his uncle done but cause to
be conveyed to him across the sea the bare wish that he should come? He had
straightway come in consequence, but on no explanation and for no signified
reward; he had come simply to avoid a possible ugliness in his not coming.
Generally addicted to such avoidances, to which it indeed seemed to him that
the quest of beauty was too often reduced, he had found his reason sufficient
until the present hour, when it was as if all reasons, all of his own at
least, had suddenly abandoned him, to the effect of his being surrounded only
with those of others, of which he was up to now ignorant, but which somehow
hung about the large still place, somehow stiffened the vague summer Sunday
and twinkled in the universal cleanness, a real revelation to him of that
possible immunity in things. He might have been sent for merely to be blown
up for the relief of the old man's mind on the perversity and futility of
his past. There was before him at all events no gage of anything else, no
intimation other than his having been, materially speaking, preceded by
preparations, to make him throw himself on a survey of prospects. What was
before him at the least was a 'big' experience -- even to have come but to be
cursed and dismissed would really be a bigger thing than yet had befallen him.
Not the form but the fact of the experience accordingly mattered -- so that
wasn't it there to a fine intensity by his standing ever and anon at the
closed door [76] of his room and feeling that with his ear intent enough he
could catch the pressure on the other side?
  The pressure was at last unmistakeable, we note, in the form of Miss Mumby,
who, having gently tapped, appeared there both to remark to him that he must
surely at last want his luncheon and to affect him afresh and in the supreme
degree as a vessel of the American want of correspondence. Miss Mumby was
ample, genial, familiar and more radiantly clean than he had ever known any
vessel, to whatever purpose destined; also the number of things _she_ took
for granted -- if it was a question of that, or perhaps rather the number of
things of which she didn't doubt and was incapable of doubting, surrounded her
together with a kind of dazzling aura, a special radiance of disconnection.
She wore a beautiful white dress, and he scarce knew what apparatus of
spotless apron and cuffs and floating streamers to match; yet she could only
again report to him of the impression that had most jumped at him from the
moment of his arrival. He saw in a moment that any difficulty on his part of
beginning with her at some point in social space, so to say, at which he had
never begun before with any such person, would count for nothing in face of
her own perfect power to begin. The faculty of beginning would be in truth
Miss Mumby's very genius, and in the moment of his apprehension of this he
felt [77] too -- he had in fact already felt it at their first meeting -- how
little his pale old postulates as to persons being 'such ' might henceforth
claim to serve him. What person met by him during his thirty hours in American
air was 'such' again as any other partaker of contact had appeared or proved,
no matter where, before his entering it? What person had not at once so
struck him in the light of violent repudiation of type, as he might save for
his sensibility have imputed type, that nothing else in the case seemed
predicable? He might have seen Miss Mumby, he was presently to recognise, in
the light of a youngish mother perhaps, a sister, a cousin, a friend, even a
possible bride, for these were aspects independent of type and boundlessly
free of range; but a 'trained nurse' was a trained nurse, and that was a
category of the most evolved -- in spite of which what category in all the
world could have lifted its head in Miss Mumby's aura?
  Still, she might have been a pleasant cousin, a first cousin, _the_ very
first a man had ever had and not in any degree 'removed', while she thus
proclaimed the cheerful ease of everything and everyone, her own above all,
and made him yield on the spot to her lightest intimation. He couldn't
possibly have held off from her in any way, and if this was in part because he
always collapsed at a touch before nurses, it was at the same time not at all
the nurse in her that now so affected [78] him, but the incalculable other
force, of which he had had no experience and which was apparently that of the
familiar in tone and manner. He had known, of a truth, familiarity greater --
much greater, but only with greater occasions and supports for it; whereas on
Miss Mumby's part it seemed independent of any or of every motive. He could
scarce have said in fine, as he followed her to their repast, at which he
foresaw in an instant that they were both to sit down, whether it more alarmed
or just more coolingly enveloped him; his slight first bewilderment at any
rate had dropped -- he had already forgotten the moment wasted two or three
hours before in wondering, with his sense of having known Nurses who gloried
in their title, how his dear second father, for instance, would in his
final extremity have liked the ministrations of a Miss. By those he himself
presently enjoyed in such different conditions, that is from across the table,
bare and polished and ever so delicately charged, of the big dusky, yet just
a little breezy dining-room, by those in short under which every association
he had ever had with anything crashed down to pile itself as so much more
tinklingly shivered glass at Miss Mumby's feet, that sort of question was
left far behind -- and doubtless would have been so even if the appeal of the
particular refection served to them had alone had the case in hand. "I'm going
to make you like our food, so you might as well begin [79] at once," his
companion had announced; and he felt it on the spot as scarce less than
delicious that this element too should play, and with such fineness, into that
harmony of the amusingly exotic which was, under his benediction, working its
will on him. "Oh yes," she rejoined in answer to his exhibition of the degree
in which what was before him did stir again to sweetness a chord of memory,
"oh yes, food's a great tie, it's like language -- you can always understand
your own, whereas in Europe I had to learn about six others."
  Miss Mumby had been to Europe, and he saw soon enough how there was nowhere
one could say she hadn't gone and nothing one could say she hadn't done --
one's perception could bear only on what she hadn't become; so that, as he
thus perceived, though she might have affected Europe even as she was now
affecting _him_, she was a pure negation of its having affected herself,
unless perhaps by adding to her power to make him feel how little he could
impose on her. She knew all about his references while he only missed hers,
and that gave her a tremendous advantage -- or would have done so hadn't she
been too much his cousin to take it. He at any rate recognised in a moment
that the so many things she had had to learn to understand over there were not
forms of speech but alimentary systems -- as to which view he quite agreed
with her that the element of the native was equally [80] rooted in both
supports of life. This gave her of course her opportunity of remarking that
she had indeed made for the assimilation of 'his' cookery -- whichever of the
varieties his had most been -- scarce less an effort than she must confess
now to making for that of his terms of utterance; where she had at once again
the triumph that he was nowhere, by his own reasoning, if he pretended to an
affinity with the nice things they were now eating and yet stood off from the
other ground. "Oh I _understand_ you, which appears to be so much more than
you do me!" he laughed; "but am I really committed to everything because I'm
committed, in the degree you see me, oh yes, to waffles and maple syrup,
followed, and on such a scale, by melons and ice-cream? You see in the one
case I have but to take in, and in the other have to give out: so can't
I have, in a quiet way the American palate without emitting the American
sounds?" Thus was he on the straightest flattest level with Miss Mumby -- it
stretched, to his imagination, without a break, a rise or a fall, _`a perte
de vue_; and thus was it already attested that the Miss Mumbys (for it was
evident there would be thousands of them) were in society, or were, at any
rate, not out of it, society thereby becoming clearly colossal. What was it,
moreover, but the best society -- as who should say anywhere -- when his
companion made the bright point that if anything had to do with sounds the
palate did? [81] returning with it also to the one already made, her due
warning that she wasn't going to have him not like everything. "But I do, I
do, I do," he declared, with his mouth full of a seasoned and sweetened, a
soft, substantial coldness and richness that were at once the revelation of
a world and the consecration of a fate; "I revel in everything, I already
wallow, behold: I move as in a dream, I assure you, and I only fear to wake
up."
  "Well, I don't know as I want you to wallow, and I certainly don't want
you to fear -- though you'll wake up soon enough, I guess," his entertainer
continued, "whatever you do. You'll wake up to some of our realities, and --
well, we won't want anything better for you: will we, Doctor?" Miss Mumby
freely proceeded on their being joined for a moment by the friendly physician
who had greeted our young man, on his uncle's behalf, at his hour of arrival,
and who, having been again for awhile with their interesting host, had left
the second nurse in charge and was about to be off to other cares. "I'm
saying to Mr Fielder that he's got to wake up to some pretty big things," she
explained to Doctor Hatch, whom it struck Gray she addressed rather as he had
heard doctors address nurses than nurses doctors; a fact contributing offhand
to his awareness, already definite, that everyone addressed everyone as he had
nowhere yet heard the address perpetrated, and that so, evidently, there were
questions connected with [82] it that must yet wait over. It was pertinently
to be felt furthermore that Doctor Hatch's own freedom, which also had quite
its own rare freshness of note, shared in the general property of the whole
appeal to him, the appeal of the very form of the great sideboard, the very
'school', though yet unrecognised by him, of the pictures hung about, the
very look and dress, the apparently odd identity, of the selected and arrayed
volumes in a bookcase charged with ornament and occupying the place of highest
dignity in the room, to take his situation for guaranteed as it was surely
not common for earthly situations to be. This he could feel, however, without
knowing, to any great purpose, what it really meant; and he was afterwards
even scarce to know what had further taken place, under Doctor Hatch's
blessing, before he passed out of the house to the verandah and the grounds,
as their limitations of reach didn't prevent their being called, and gave
himself up to inquiries now permittedly direct.
  Doctor Hatch's message or momentary act of quaint bright presence came to
him thus, on the verandah, while shining expanses opened, as an invitation to
some extraordinary confidence, some flight of optimism without a precedent,
as a positive hint in fine that it depended on himself alone to step straight
into the chariot of the sun, which on his mere nod would conveniently
descend there to the edge of the piazza, and whirl away [83] for increase of
acquaintance with the time, as it was obviously going to be, of his life. This
was but his reading indeed of the funny terms in which the delightful man put
it to him that he seemed by his happy advent to have brought on for his uncle
a prospect, a rise of pitch, not dissimilar from that sort of vision; by so
high a tide of ease had the sick room above been flooded, and such a lot of
good would clearly await the patient from seeing him after a little and at the
perfect proper moment. It was to be that of Mr Betterman's competent choice:
he lay there as just for the foretaste of it, which was wholly tranquillising,
and could be trusted -- what else did doctor and nurse engage for? -- to know
the psychological hour on its striking and then, to complete felicity, have
his visitor introduced. His present mere assurance of the visitor was in short
so agreeable to him, and by the same token to Doctor Hatch himself -- which
was above all what the latter had conveyed -- that the implication of the
agreeable to Graham in return might fairly have been some imponderable yet
ever so sensible tissue, voluminous interwoven gold and silver, flung as
a mantle over his shoulders while he went. Gray had never felt around him
any like envelope whatever; so that on his looking forth at all the candid
clearness -- which struck him too, ever so amusingly, as even more candid when
occasionally and aggressively, that is residentially, obstructed than when not
-- [84] what he inwardly and fantastically compared it to was some presented
quarto page, vast and fair, ever so distinctly printed and ever so
unexpectedly vignetted, of a volume of which the leaves would be turned for
him one by one and with no more trouble on his own part than when a friendly
service beside him at the piano, where he so often sat, relieved him, from
sheet to sheet, of touching his score.
  Wasn't he thus now again 'playing', as it had been a lifelong resource to
him to play in that other posture? -- a question promoted by the way the
composition suddenly broke into the vividest illustrational figure, that of a
little man encountered on one of his turns of the verandah and who, affecting
him at first as a small waiting and watching, an almost crouching gnome, the
neat domestic goblin of some old Germanic, some harmonised, familiarised
legend, sat and stared at him from the depths of an arrested rocking-chair
after a fashion nothing up to then had led him to preconceive. This was
a different note from any yet, a queer, sharp, hard particle in all the
softness; and it was sensible too, oddly enough, that the small force of their
concussion but grew with its coming over him the next moment that he simply
had before him Rosanna Gaw's prodigious parent. _Of course_ it was Mr Gaw,
whom he had never seen, and of whom Rosanna in the old time had so little
talked; her mother alone had talked [85] of him in those days, and to his
own mother only -- with whom Gray had indeed himself afterwards talked not a
little; but the intensity of the certitude came not so much by any plain as by
quite the most roundabout presumption, the fact of his always having felt that
she required some strange accounting for, and that here was the requirement
met by just the ripest revelation. She had been involved in something,
produced by something, intimately pressing upon her and yet as different as
possible from herself; and here was the concentrated difference -- which
showed him too, with each lapsing second, its quality of pressure. Abel Gaw
struck him in this light as very finely blanched, as somehow squeezed together
by the operation of an inward energy or necessity, and as animated at the same
time by the conviction that, should he sit there long enough and still enough,
the young man from Europe, known to be on the premises, might finally reward
his curiosity. Mr Gaw was curiosity embodied -- Gray was by the end of the
minute entirely assured of that; it in fact quite seemed to him that he had
never yet in all his life caught the prying passion so shamelessly in the
act. Shamelessly, he was afterwards to remember having explained to himself,
because his sense of the reach of the sharp eyes in the small white face, and
of their not giving way for a moment before his own, suggested to him, even if
he could scarce have said why to that extent, the act of listening at [86] the
door, at the very keyhole, of a room, combined with the attempt to make it
good under sudden detection.
  So it was, at any rate, that our speculative friend, the impression of the
next turn of the case aiding, figured the extension, without forms, without
the shade of a form, of their unmitigated mutual glare. The initiation of this
exchange by the little old gentleman in the chair, who gave for so long no
sign of moving or speaking, couldn't but practically determine in Graham's own
face some resistance to the purpose exhibited and for which it was clear no
apology impended. By the time he had recognised that his presence was in
question for Mr Gaw with such an intensity as it had never otherwise, he felt,
had the benefit of, however briefly, save under some offered gage or bribe, he
had also made out that no 'form' would survive for twenty seconds in any close
relation with the personage, and that if ever he had himself known curiosity
as to what might happen when manners were consistently enough ignored it was a
point on which he should at once be enlightened. His fellow-visitor, of whose
being there Doctor Hatch and Miss Mumby were presumably unaware, continued to
ignore everything but the opportunity he enjoyed and the certainty that Graham
would contribute to it -- which certainty made in fact his profit. The profit,
that is, couldn't possibly fail unless Gray should turn his back and walk off;
which was [87] of course possible, but would then saddle Gray himself with the
repudiation of forms: so that -- yes, infallibly -- in proportion as the young
man _had_ to be commonly civil would Mr Gaw's perhaps unholy satisfaction of
it be able to prevail. The young man had taken it home that he couldn't simply
stare long enough for successful defence by the time that, presently moving
nearer, he uttered his adversary's name with no intimation of a doubt. Mr Gaw
failed, Gray was afterwards to inform Rosanna, "to so much as take this up";
he was left with everything on his hands but the character of his identity,
the indications of his face, the betrayals he should so much less succeed
in suppressing than his adversary would succeed in reading them. The figure
presented hadn't stirred from his posture otherwise than by a motion of eye
just perceptible as Graham moved; it was drinking him in, our hero felt, and
by this treatment of the full cup, continuously applied to the lips, stillness
was of course imposed. It didn't again so much as recognise, by any sign
given, Graham's remark that an acquaintance with Miss Gaw from of old involved
naturally _their_ acquaintance: there was no question of Miss Gaw, her friend
found himself after another minute divining, as there was none of objects or
appearances immediately there about them; the question was of something a
thousand times more relevant and present, of something the interloper's
silence, far [88] more than breathed words could have done, represented the
fond hope of mastering.
  Graham thus held already, by the old man's conviction, a secret of high
value, yet which, with the occasion stretched a little, would practically
be at his service -- so much as that at least, with the passage of another
moment, he had concluded to; and all the while, in the absurdest way, without
his guessing, without his at all measuring, his secret himself. Mr Gaw fairly
made him want to -- want, that is, as a preliminary or a stopgap, to guess
what it had best, most desirably and most effectively, become; for shouldn't
he positively _like_ to have something of the sort in order just to disoblige
this gentleman? Strange enough how it came to him at once as a result of the
father's refusal of attention to any connection he might have glanced at with
the daughter, strange enough how it came to him, under the first flush of heat
he had known since his arrival, that two could play at such a game and that if
Rosanna's interests were to be so slighted her relative himself should miss
even the minimum of application as one of them. "He must have wanted to know,
he must have wanted to know---!" this young woman was on a later day to have
begun to explain; without going on, however, since by that time Gray had
rather made out, the still greater rush of his impressions helping, the truth
of Mr Gaw's desire. It bore, that appetite, upon a single point and, daughter
or no [89] daughter, on nothing else in the world -- the question of what
Gray's 'interest', in the light of his uncle's intentions, might size up to;
those intentions having, to the Gaw imagination, been of course apprehensible
on the spot, and within the few hours that had lapsed, by a nephew even of but
rudimentary mind. At the present hour meanwhile, short of the miracle which
our friend's counter-scrutiny alone could have brought about, there worked for
this young intelligence, and with no small sharpness, the fact itself of such
a revealed relation to the ebb of their host's life -- upon which was thrust
the appearance of its being, watch in hand, all impatiently, or in other words
all offensively, timed. The very air at this instant tasted to Gray, quite
as if something under his tongue had suddenly turned from the sweet to the
appreciably sour, of an assumption diffused through it in respect to the
rudiments of mind. He was afterwards to date the breaking-in upon him of
the general measure of the smallest vision of business a young man might
self-respectingly confess to from Mr Gaw's extraordinary tacit 'Oh come, you
can't fool _me_: don't I know you know what I want to know -- don't I know
what it must mean for you to have been here since six o'clock this morning
with nothing whatever else to do than just to take it in?'
  That was it -- Gray was to have taken in the more or less definite value
involved for him in [90] his uncle's supposedly near extinction, and was to
be capable, if not of expressing it on the spot in the only terms in which a
value of any sort could exist for this worthy, yet still at least of liability
to such a betrayal as would yield him something to conclude upon. It was only
afterwards, once more, that our young man was to master the logic of the
conclusive as it prevailed for Mr Gaw; what concerned his curiosity was to
settle whether or no they were in presence together of a really big fact --
distinguishing as the Gaw mind did among such dimensions and addressed as it
essentially was to a special question -- a question as yet unrecognised by
Gray. He was subsequently to have his friend's word to go upon -- when, in the
extraordinary light of Rosanna's explication, he read clear what he had been
able on the verandah but half to glimmer out: the queer truth of Mr Gaw's
hunger to learn to what extent he had anciently, to what degree he had
irremediably, ruined his whilom associate. He didn't know -- so strange was
it, at the time and since, that, thanks to the way Mr Betterman had himself
fixed things, he couldn't be sure; but what he wanted, and what he hung about
so displeasingly to sniff up the least stray sign of, was a confirmation of
his belief that Doctor Hatch's and Miss Mumby's patient had never really
recovered from the wound of years before. They were nursing him now for
another complaint [91] altogether, this one admittedly such as must, with but
the scantest further reprieve, dispose of him; whereas doubts were deep, as
Mr Gaw at least entertained them, as to whether the damage he supposed his own
just resentment to have inflicted when propriety and opportunity combined to
inspire him was amenable even to nursing the most expert or to medication the
most subtle. These mysteries of calculation were of course impenetrable to
Gray during the moments at which we see him so almost indescribably exposed
at once and reinforced; but the effect of the sharper and sharper sense as of
a spring pressed by his companion was that a _whole_ consciousness suddenly
welled up in him and that within a few more seconds he had become aware of a
need absolutely adverse to any trap that might be laid for his candour. He
could as little have then said why as he could vividly have phrased it under
the knowledge to come, but that his mute interlocutor desired somehow their
association in a judgment of what his uncle was 'worth', a judgment from which
a comparatively conceited nephew might receive an incidental lesson, played
through him as a certitude and produced quite another inclination. That
recognition of the pleasant on which he had been floating affirmed itself as
in the very face of so embodied a pretension to affirm the direct opposite, to
thrust up at him in fine a horrid contradiction -- a [92] contradiction which
he next heard himself take, after the happiest fashion, the straightest way to
rebut.
  "I'm sure you'll be glad to know that I seem to be doing my uncle a
tremendous lot of good. They tell me I'm really bringing him round" -- and
Graham smiled down at little blanched Mr Gaw. "I don't despair at all of his
getting much better."
  It was on this that for the first time Mr Gaw became articulate.
"Better---?" he strangely quavered, and as if his very eyes questioned such
conscious flippancy.
  "Why yes -- through cheering him up. He takes, I gather," Gray went on,
"as much pleasure as I do---!" His assurance, however, had within the minute
dropped a little -- the effect of it might really reach, he apprehended,
beyond his idea. The old man had been odd enough, but now of a sudden he
looked sick, and that one couldn't desire.
  "'Pleasure'---?" he was nevertheless able to echo; while it struck Gray
that no sound so weak had ever been so sharp, or none so sharp ever so weak.
"Pleasure in dying---?" Mr Gaw asked in this flatness of doubt.
  "But my dear sir," said Gray, his impulse to be jaunty still nevertheless
holding out a little, "but, my dear sir, if, as it strikes me, he isn't
dying---?" [93]
  "Oh twaddle!" snapped Mr Gaw with the emphasis of his glare -- shifted a
moment, Gray next saw, to a new object in range. Gray felt himself even before
turning for it rejoined by Miss Mumby, who, rounding the corner of the house,
had paused as in presence of an odd conjunction; not made the less odd
moreover by Mr Gaw's instant appeal to her. "You think he ain't then going
to---?"
  He had to leave it at that, but Miss Mumby supplied, with the loudest
confidence, what appeared to be wanted. "He ain't going to get better? Oh we
hope so!" she declared to Graham's delight.
  It helped him to contribute in his own way. "Mr Gaw's surprise seems for his
holding out!"
  "Oh I guess he'll hold out," Miss Mumby was pleased to say.
  "Then if he ain't dying what's the fuss about?" Mr Gaw wanted to know.
  "Why there ain't any fuss -- but what _you_ seem to make," Miss Mumby could
quite assure him.
  "Oh well, if you answer for it---!" He got up on this, though with an
alertness that, to Gray's sense, didn't work quite truly, and stood an instant
looking from one of his companions to the other, while our young man's
eyes, for their part, put a question to Miss Mumby's -- a question which,
articulated, would have had the sense of [94] 'What on earth's the matter with
him?' There seemed no knowing how Mr Gaw would take things -- as Miss Mumby,
for that matter, appeared also at once to reflect.
  "We're sure enough not to want to have _you_ sick too," she declared indeed
with more cheer than apprehension; to which she added, however, to cover all
the ground, "You just leave Mr Betterman to us and take care of yourself. We
never say die and we won't have you say it -- either about him or anyone else,
Mr Gaw."
  This gentleman, so addressed, straightened and cleared himself in such a
manner as to show that he saw, for the moment, Miss Mumby's point; which he
then, a wondrous small concentration of studied blankness -- studied, that is,
his companions were afterwards both to show they had felt -- commemorated his
appreciation of in a tiny, yet triumphant, "Well, that's all right!"
  "It ain't so right but what I'm going to see you home," Miss Mumby returned
with authority; adding, however, for Graham's benefit, that she had come down
to tell him his uncle was now ready. "You just go right up -- you'll find Miss
Goodenough there. And you'll see for yourself," she said, "how fresh he is!"
  "Thanks -- that will be beautiful!" Gray brightly responded; but with his
eyes on Mr Gaw, whom of a sudden, somehow, he didn't like to leave. [95]
  It at any rate determined on the little man's part a surprised inquiry.
"Then you haven't seen him yet -- with your grand account of him?"
  "No -- but the account," Gray smiled, "has an authority beyond mine.
Besides," he kept on after this gallant reference, "I feel what I shall do for
him."
  "Oh they'll have great times!" -- Miss Mumby, with an arm at the old man's
service, bravely guaranteed it. But she also admonished Graham: "Don't keep
him waiting, and mind what Miss Goodenough tells you! So now, Mr Gaw -- you're
to mind _me_!" she concluded; while this subject of her more extemporised
attention so far complied as slowly to face with her in the direction of
the other house. Gray wondered about him, but immensely trusted Miss Mumby,
and only watched till he saw them step off together to the lawn, Mr Gaw
independent of support, with something in his consciously stiffened even
if not painfully assumed little air, as noted thus from behind, that quite
warranted his protectress. Seen that way, yes, he was a tremendous little
person; and Gray, excited, immensely readvised and turning accordingly to his
own business, felt the assault of impressions fairly shake him as he went --
shake him though it apparently seemed most capable of doing but to the effect
of hilarity.

[96]
                             -=-=-  2  -=-=-

Whether or no by its so different appearance from that of Mr Gaw, the figure
propped on pillows in the vast cool room and lighted in such a way that the
clear deepening west seemed to flush toward it, through a wide high window,
in the interest of its full effect, impressed our young man as massive
and expansive, as of a beautiful bland dignity indeed -- though emulating
Rosanna's relative, he was at first to gather, by a perfect readiness to stare
rather than speak. Miss Goodenough had hovered a little, for full assurance,
but then had thrown off with a _timbre_ of voice never yet used for Gray's own
ear in any sick room, "Well, I guess you won't come to blows!" and had left
them face to face -- besides leaving the air quickened by the freedom of her
humour. They were face to face for the time across an interval which, to do
her justice, she had not taken upon herself to deal with directly; this in
spite of Gray's apprehension at the end of a minute that she might, by the
touch of her hand or the pitch of her spirit, push him further forward than he
had immediately judged decent to advance. He had stopped at a certain distance
from the great bed, stopped really for consideration and deference, or through
the instinct of submitting himself first of all to approval, or at least to
encouragement; the space, not great enough for [97] reluctance and not small
enough for presumption, showed him ready to obey any sign his uncle should
make. Mr Betterman struck him, in this high quietude of contemplation, much
less as formidable than as mildly and touchingly august; he had not supposed
him, he became suddenly aware, so great a person -- a presence like that of
some weary veteran of affairs, one of the admittedly eminent whose last words
would be expected to figure in history. The large fair face, rather square
than heavy, was neither clouded nor ravaged, but finely serene; the
silver-coloured hair seemed to bind the broad high brow as with a band of
splendid silk, while the eyes rested on Gray with an air of acceptance beyond
attestation by the mere play of cheer or the comparative gloom of relief.
  "Ah _le beau type, le beau type_!" was during these instants the visitor's
inward comment breaking into one of the strange tongues that experience had
appointed him privately to use, in many a case, for the appropriation of
aspects and appearances. It was not till afterwards that he happened to learn
how his uncle had been capable, two or three hours before seeing him, of
offering cheek and chin to the deft ministration of a barber, a fact highly
illuminating, though by that time the gathered lights were thick. What the
patient owed on the spot to the sacrifice, he easily made out, was that look
as of the last [98] refinement of preparation, that positive splendour of
the immaculate, which was really, on one's taking it all in, but part of
an earnest recognition of his guest's own dignity. The grave beauty of the
personal presence, the vague anticipation as of something that might go on to
be commemorated for its example, the great pure fragrant room, bathed in the
tempered glow of the afternoon's end, the general lucidity and tranquillity
and security of the whole presented case, begot in fine, on our young friend's
part, an extraordinary sense that as he himself was important enough to be
on show, so these peculiar perfections that met him were but so many virtual
honours rendered and signs of the high level to which he had mounted. On show,
yes -- that was it, and more wonderfully than could be said: Gray was sure
after a little of how right he was to stand off as yet in any interest of his
own significance that might be involved. There was clearly something his uncle
so wanted him to be that he should run no possible danger of being it to
excess, and that if he might only there and then grasp it he would ask but to
proceed, for decency's sake, according to his lights: just as so short a time
before a like force of suggestion had played upon him from Mr Gaw -- each of
these appeals clothing him in its own way with such an oddity of pertinence,
such a bristling set of attributes. This wait of the parties to the present
one for articulate [99] expression, on either side, of whatever it was that
might most concern them together, promised also to last as the tension had
lasted down on the verandah, and would perhaps indeed have drawn itself
further out if Gray hadn't broken where he stood into a cry of admiration --
since it could scarcely be called less -- that blew to the winds every fear of
overstepping.
  "It's really worth one's coming so far, uncle, if you don't mind my saying
so -- it's really worth a great pilgrimage to see anything so splendid."
  The old man heard, clearly, as by some process that was still deeply active;
and then after a pause that represented, Gray was sure, no failure at all of
perception, but only the wide embrace of a possibility of pleasure, sounded
bravely back: "Does it come up to what you've seen?"
  It was Gray rather who was for a moment mystified -- though only to further
spontaneity when he had caught the sense of the question. "Oh, you come up
to everything -- by which I mean, if I may, that nothing comes up to _you_!
I mean, if I may," he smiled, "that you yourself, uncle, affect me as the
biggest and most native American impression that I can possibly be exposed
to."
  "Well," said Mr Betterman, and again as with a fond deliberation, "what I'm
going to like, I see, is to listen to the way you talk. That," he added with
his soft distinctness, a singleness of [100] note somehow for the many things
meant, "that, I guess, is about what I most wanted you to come for. Unless it
be to look at you too. I like to look right _at_ you."
  "Well," Gray harmoniously laughed again, "if even _that_ can give you
pleasure---!" He stood as for inspection, easily awkward, pleasantly loose,
holding up his head as to make the most of no great stature. "I've never been
so sorry that there isn't more of me."
  The fine old eyes on the pillow kept steadily taking him in; he could quite
see that he happened to be, as he might have called it, right; and though he
had never felt himself, within his years, extraordinarily or excitingly wrong,
so that this felicity might have turned rather flat for him, there was still
matter for emotion, for the immediate throb and thrill, in finding success so
crown him. He had been spared, thank goodness, any positive shame, but had
never known his brow brushed or so much as tickled by the laurel or the bay.
'Does it mean,' he might have murmured to himself, 'the strangest shift of
standards?' -- but his uncle had meanwhile spoken. "Well, there's all of you
I'm going to want. And there must be more of you than I see. Because you _are_
different," Mr Betterman considered.
  "But different from what?" Truly was Gray interested to know.
  It took Mr Betterman a moment to say, but [101] he seemed to convey that it
might have been guessed. "From what you'd have been if you had come."
  The young man was indeed drawn in. "If I had come years ago? Well, perhaps,"
he so far happily agreed -- "for I've often thought of that myself. Only, you
see," he laughed, "I'm different from _that_ too. I mean from what I was when
I didn't come."
  Mr Betterman looked at it quietly. "You're different in the sense that
you're older -- and you seem to me rather older than I supposed. All the
better, all the better," he continued to make out. "You're the same person I
didn't tempt, the same person I _couldn't_ -- that time when I tried. I see
you are, I see _what_ you are."
  "You see terribly much, sir, for the few minutes!" smiled Gray.
  "Oh when I _want_ to see---!" the old man comfortably enough sighed. "I
take you in, I take you in; though I grant that I don't quite see how you can
understand. Still," he pursued, "there are things for you to tell me. You're
different from _anything_, and if we had time for particulars I should like to
know a little how you've kept so. I was afraid you wouldn't turn out perhaps
so thoroughly the sort of thing I liked to think -- for I hadn't much more to
go upon than what _she_ said, you know. However," Mr Betterman wound up as
with due comfort, "it's [102] by what she says that I've gone -- and I want
her to know that I don't feel fooled."
  If Gray's wonderment could have been said to rest anywhere, hour after hour,
long enough to be detected in the act, the detaining question would have been
more than any other perhaps that of whether Miss Gaw would 'come up'. Now that
she did so however, in this quiet way, it had no strangeness that his being
at once glad couldn't make but a mouthful of; and the recent interest of what
she had lately written to him was as nothing to the interest of her becoming
personally his uncle's theme. With which, at the same time, it was pleasanter
to him than anything else to speak of her himself. "If you allude to Rosanna
Gaw you'll no doubt understand how tremendously I want to see her."
  The sick man waited a little -- but not, it quite seemed, from lack of
understanding. "She wants tremendously to see you, Graham. You might know that
of course from her going to work so." Then again he gathered his thoughts and
again after a little went on. "She had a good idea, and I love her for it; but
I'm afraid my own hasn't been so very much to give _her_ the satisfaction.
I've wanted it myself, and -- well, here I am getting it from you. Yes," he
kept up, his eyes never moving from his nephew, "you couldn't give me more if
you had tried, from so far back, on purpose. But I can't tell you half!" He
exhaled a long [103] breath -- he was a little spent. "You tell _me_. You tell
_me_."
  "I'm tiring you, sir," Gray said.
  "Not by letting me see -- you'd only tire me if you didn't." Then for the
first time his eyes glanced about. "Haven't they put a place for you to sit?
Perhaps they knew," he suggested, while Gray reached out for a chair, "perhaps
they knew just how I'd want to see you. There seems nothing they don't know,"
he contentedly threw off again.
  Gray had his chair before him, his hands on the back tilting it a little.
"They're extraordinary. I've never seen anything like them. They help me
tremendously," he cheerfully confessed.
  Mr Betterman, at this, seemed to wonder. "Why, have you difficulties?"
  "Well," said Gray, still with his chair, "you say I'm different -- if you
mean it for my being alien from what I feel surrounding me. But if you knew
how funny all _that_ seems to me," he laughed, "you'd understand that I clutch
at protection."
  "'Funny'?" -- his host was clearly interested, without offence, in the term.
  "Well then terrific, sir!"
  "So terrific that you need protection?"
  "Well," Gray explained, gently shaking his chair-back, "when one simply sees
that nothing of one's former experience serves, and that one doesn't know
anything about anything---!" [104]
  More than ever at this his uncle's look might have covered him. "Anything
round here -- no! That's it, that's it," the old man blandly repeated. "That's
just the way -- I mean the way I hoped. _She_ knows you don't know -- and
doesn't want you to either. But put down your chair," he said; and then after,
when Gray, instantly and delicately complying, had placed the precious article
with every precaution back where it had stood: "Sit down here on the bed.
There's margin."
  "Yes," smiled Gray, doing with all consideration as he was told, "you don't
seem anywhere very much _`a l''etroit_."
  "I presume," his uncle returned, "you know French thoroughly."
  Gray confessed to the complication. "Of course when one has heard it almost
from the cradle---!"
  "And the other tongues too?"
  He seemed to wonder if, for his advantage, he mightn't deny them. "Oh a
couple of others. In the countries there they come easy."
  "Well, they wouldn't have come easy here -- and I guess nothing else would;
I mean of the things _we_ principally grow. And I won't have you tell me,"
Mr Betterman said, "that if you had taken that old chance they might have done
so. We don't know anything about it, and at any rate it would have spoiled
you. I mean for what you _are_."
  "Oh," returned Gray, on the bed, but pressing lightly, "oh what I 'am'---!"
[105]
  "My point isn't so much for what you are as for what you're not. So I won't
have anything else; I mean I won't have you but as I want you," his host
explained. "I want you just this way."
  With which, while the young man kept his arms folded and his hands tucked
away as for compression of his personal extent and weight, they exchanged, at
their close range, the most lingering look yet. Extraordinary to him, in the
gravity of this relation, his deeper impression of something beautiful and
spreadingly clear -- very much as if the wide window and the quiet clean sea
and the finer sunset light had all had, for assistance and benediction, their
word to say to it. They seemed to combine most to remark together 'What an
exquisite person is your uncle!' This is what he had for the minute the sense
of taking from them, and the expression of his assent to it was in the tone of
his next rejoinder. "If I could only know what it is you'd most like---!"
  "Never mind what I most like -- only tell me, only tell me," his companion
again said: "You can't say anything that won't absolutely suit me; in fact I
defy you to, though you mayn't at all see why that's the case. I've got you --
without a flaw. So!" Mr Betterman triumphantly breathed. Gray's sense was by
this time of his being examined and appraised as never in his life before --
very much as in the exposed state of an important 'piece', an object of value
picked, for [106] finer estimation, from under containing glass. There was
nothing then but to face it, unless perhaps also to take a certain comfort in
his being, as he might feel, practically clean and in condition. That such an
hour had its meaning, and that the meaning might be great for him, this of
course surged softly in, more and more, from every point of the circle that
held him; but with the consciousness making also more at each moment for an
uplifting, a fantastic freedom, a sort of sublime simplification, in which
nothing seemed to depend on him or to have at any time so depended. He was
_really_ face to face thus with bright immensities, and the handsome old
presence from which, after a further moment, a hand had reached forth a little
to take his own, guaranteed by the quietest of gestures at once their truth
and the irrelevance, as he could only feel it, of their scale. Cool and not
weak, to his responsive grasp, this retaining force, to which strength was
added by what next came. "It's not for myself, it's not for myself -- I mean
your being as I say. What do I matter now except to have recognised it? No,
Graham -- it's in another connection." Was the connection then with Rosanna?
Graham had time to wonder, and even to think what a big thing this might make
of it, before his uncle brought out: "It's for the world."
  "The world?" -- Gray's vagueness again reigned.
  "Well, our great public." [107]
  "Oh your great public---!"
  The exclamation, the cry of alarm, even if also of amusement in face of such
a connection as that quickened for an instant the good touch of the cool hand.
"That's the way I like you to sound. It's the way she told me you _would_ -- I
mean that would be natural to you. And it's precisely why -- being the awful
great public it is -- we require the difference that you'll make. So you see
you're for our people."
  Poor Graham's eyes widened. "I shall make a difference for your people---?"
  But his uncle serenely went on. "Don't think you know them yet, or what it's
like over here at all. You may think so and feel you're prepared. But you
don't know till you've had the whole thing up against you."
  "May I ask, sir," Gray smiled, "what you're talking about?"
  His host met his eyes on it, but let it drop. "You'll see soon enough for
yourself. Don't mind what I say. That isn't the thing for you now -- it's all
done. Only be true," said Mr Betterman. "You _are_ and, as I've said, can't
help yourself." With which he relapsed again to one of his good conclusions.
"And after all don't mind the public either."
  "Oh," returned Gray, "all great publics are awful."
  "Ah no no -- I won't have that. Perhaps [108] they may be, but the trouble
we're concerned with is about ours -- and about some other things too." Gray
felt in the hand's tenure a small emphasizing lift of the arm, while the head
moved a little as off toward the world they spoke of -- which amounted for our
young man, however, but to a glance at all the outside harmony and prosperity,
bathed as these now seemed in the colour of the flushed sky. Absurd altogether
that he should be in any way enlisted against such things. His entertainer,
all the same, continued to see the reference and to point it. "The enormous
preponderance of money. Money is their life."
  "But surely even here it isn't everyone who has it. Also," he freely
laughed, "isn't it a good thing to have?"
  "A very good thing indeed." Then his uncle waited as in the longest
inspection yet. "But you don't know anything about it."
  "Not about large sums," Gray cheerfully admitted.
  "I mean it has never been near you. That sticks out of you -- the way it
hasn't. I knew it couldn't have been -- and then she told me _she_ knew. I see
you're a blank -- and nobody here's a blank, not a creature I've ever touched.
That's what I've wanted," the old man went on -- "a perfect clean blank. I
don't mean there aren't heaps of them that are damned fools, just as there
[109] are heaps of others, bigger heaps probably, that are damned knaves;
except that mostly the knave _is_ the biggest fool. But those are not blanks;
they're full of the poison -- without a blest other idea. Now you're the blank
I want, if you follow -- and yet you're not the blatant ass."
  "I'm not sure I quite follow," Gray laughed, "but I'm very much obliged."
  "Have you ever done three cents' worth of business?" Mr Betterman judicially
asked.
  It helped our young man to some ease of delay. "Well, I'm afraid I can't
claim to have had much business to do. Also you're wrong, sir," he added,
"about my not being a blatant ass. Oh please understand that I _am_ a blatant
ass. Let there be no mistake about that," Gray touchingly pleaded.
  "Yes -- but not on the subject of anything but business."
  "Well -- no doubt on the subject of business more than on any other."
  Still the good eyes rested. "Tell me one thing, other than that, for which
you haven't at least _some_ intelligence."
  "Oh sir, there are no end of things, and it's odd one should have to prove
that -- though it would take me long. But I allow there's nothing I understand
so little and like so little as the mystery of the 'market' and the hustle of
any sort."
  "You utterly loathe and abhor the hustle! That's what I blissfully want of
you," said Mr Betterman. [110]
  "You ask of me the declaration---?" Gray considered. "But how can I _know_,
don't you see? -- when I _am_ such a blank, when I've never had three cents'
worth of business, as you say, to transact?"
  "The people who don't loathe it are always finding it somehow to do, even if
preposterously for the most part, and dishonestly. Your case," Mr Betterman
reasoned, "is that you haven't a grain of the imagination of any such
interest. If you _had_ had," he wound up, "it would have stirred in you that
first time."
  Gray followed, as his kinsman called it, enough to be able to turn his
memory a moment on this. "Yes, I think my imagination, small scrap of a thing
as it was, did work then somehow against you."
  "Which was exactly against business" -- the old man easily made the point.
"I _was_ business. I've _been_ business and nothing else in the world. I'm
business at this moment still -- because I can't be anything else. I mean I've
such a head for it. So don't think you can put it on me that I haven't thought
out what I'm doing to good purpose. I do what I do but too abominably well."
With which he weakened for the first time to a faint smile. "It's none of your
affair."
  "Isn't it a little my affair," Gray as genially objected, "to be more
touched than I can express by your attention to me -- as well (if you'll let
me [111] say so) as rather astonished at it?" And then while his host took
this without response, only engaged as to more entire repletion in the steady
measure of him, he added further, even though aware in sounding it of the
complacency or fatuity, of the particular absurdity, his question might have
seemed to embody: "What in the world can I want but to meet you in every way?"
His perception at last was full, the great strange sense of everything smote
his eyes; so that without the force of his effort at the most general amenity
possible his lids and his young lips might have convulsively closed. Even for
his own ear 'What indeed?' was thus the ironic implication -- which he felt
himself quite grimace to show he should have understood somebody else's
temptation to make. Here, however, where his uncle's smile might pertinently
have broadened, the graver blandness settled again, leaving him in face of it
but the more awkwardly assured. He felt as if he couldn't say enough to abate
the ugliness of that -- and perhaps it even did come out to the fact of beauty
that no profession of the decent could appear not to coincide with the very
candour of the greedy. "I'm prepared for anything, yes -- in the way of a huge
inheritance": he didn't care if it _might_ sound like that when he next went
on, since what could he do but just melt to the whole benignity? "If I only
understood what it is I can best do for you." [112]
  "Do? The question isn't of your doing, but simply of your being."
  Gray cast about. "But don't they come to the same thing?"
  "Well, I guess that for you they'll have to."
  "Yes, sir," Gray answered -- "but suppose I should say 'Don't keep insisting
so on me'?" Then he had a romantic flight which was at the same time, for that
moment at least, a sincere one. "I don't know that I came out so very much for
myself."
  "Well, if you didn't it only shows the more what you are" -- Mr Betterman
made the point promptly. "It shows you've got the kind of imagination that has
nothing to do with the kind I so perfectly see you haven't. And if you don't
do things for yourself," he went on, "you'll be doing them the more for just
what I say." With which too, as Graham but pleadingly gaped: "You'll be doing
them for everyone else -- that is finding it impossible to do what _they_ do.
From the moment they notice that -- well, it will be what I want. We know, we
know," he remarked further and as if this quite settled it.
  Any ambiguity in his 'we' after an instant cleared up; he was to have
alluded but ever so sparely, through all this scene, to Rosanna Gaw, but he
alluded now, and again it had for Gray an amount of reference that was like a
great sum of items in a bill imperfectly scanned. None the [113] less it left
him desiring still more clearness. His whole soul centred at this point in
the need not to have contributed by some confused accommodation to a strange
theory of his future. Strange he could but feel this one to be, however
simply, that is on however large and vague an assumption, it might suit
others, amid their fathomless resources and their luxuries or perversities of
waste, to see it. He wouldn't be smothered in the vague, whatever happened,
and had now the gasp and upward shake of the head of a man in too deep water.
"What I want to insist on," he broke out with it, "is that I mustn't consent
to any exaggeration in the interest of your, or of any other, sublime view
of me, view of my capacity of any sort. There's no sublime view of me to be
taken that consorts in the least with any truth; and I should be a very poor
creature if I didn't here and now assure you that no proof in the world
exists, or has for a moment existed, of my being capable of anything
whatever."
  He might have supposed himself for a little to have produced something of
the effect that would naturally attach to a due vividness in this truth -- for
didn't his uncle now look at him just a shade harder, before the fixed eyes
closed, indeed, as under a pressure to which they had at last really to
yield? They closed, and the old white face was for the couple of minutes so
thoroughly still without them that a slight uneasiness quickened [114] him,
and it would have taken but another moment to make a slight sound, which he
had to turn his head for the explanation of, reach him as the response to an
appeal. The door of the room, opening gently, had closed again behind Miss
Goodenough, who came forward softly, but with more gravity, Gray thought,
than he had previously seen her show. Still in his place and conscious of the
undiminished freshness of her invalid's manual emphasis, he looked at her
for some opinion as to the latter's appearance, or to the move on his own
part next indicated; during which time her judgment itself, considering
Mr Betterman, a trifle heavily waited. Gray's doubt, before the stillness
which had followed so great even if so undiscourageable an effort, moved him
to some play of disengagement; whereupon he knew himself again checked, and
there, once more, the fine old eyes rested on him. "I'm afraid I've tired him
out," he could but say to the nurse, who made the motion to feel her patient's
pulse without the effect of his releasing his visitor. Gray's hand was
retained still, but his kinsman's eyes and next words were directed to Miss
Goodenough.
  "It's all right -- even more so than I told you it was going to be."
  "Why of course it's all right -- you look too sweet together!" she
pronounced.
  "But I mean I've got him; I mean I make him squirm" -- which words had
somehow the richest [115] gravity of any yet; "but all it does for his
resistance is that he squirms right _to_ me."
  "Oh we won't have any resistance!" Miss Goodenough freely declared. "Though
for all the fight you've got in you still---!" she in fine altogether backed
Mr Betterman.
  He covered his nephew again as for a final or crushing appraisement, then
going on for Miss Goodenough's benefit: "He tried something a minute ago to
settle me, but I wish you could just have heard how he expressed himself."
  "It _is_ a pleasure to hear him -- when he's good!" She laughed with a shade
of impatience.
  "He's never so good as when he wants to be bad. So there you are, sir!" the
old man said. "You're like the princess in the fairy-tale; you've only to open
your mouth---"
  "And the pearls and diamonds pop out!" -- Miss Goodenough, for her patient's
relief, completed his meaning. "So don't try for toads and snakes!" she
promptly went on to Gray. To which she added with still more point: "And now
you must go."
  "Not one little minute more?" His uncle still held him.
  "Not one, sir!" Miss Goodenough decided.
  "It isn't to talk," the old man explained. "I like just to look at him."
  "So do I," said Miss Goodenough; "but we can't always do everything we
like." [116]
  "No then, Graham -- remember that. You'd like to have persuaded me that I
don't know what I mean. But you must understand you haven't."
  His hand had loosened, and Gray got up, turning a face now flushed and
a little disordered from one of them to the other. "I don't pretend to
understand anything!"
  It turned his uncle to their companion. "Isn't he fine?"
  "Of course he's fine," said Miss Goodenough; "but you've quite worn him
out."
  "Have I quite worn you out?" Mr Betterman calmly inquired.
  As if indeed finished, each thumb now in a pocket of his trousers, the young
man dimly smiled. "I think you must have -- quite."
  "Well, let Miss Mumby look after you. He'll find her there?" his uncle asked
of her colleague. And then as the latter showed at this her first indecision,
"Isn't she somewhere round?" he demanded.
  Miss Goodenough had wavered, but as if it really mattered for the friend
there present she responsibly concluded. "Well, no -- just for a while." And
she appealed to Gray's indulgence. "She's had to go to Mr Gaw."
  "Why, is Mr Gaw sick?" Mr Betterman asked with detachment.
  "That's what we shall know when she comes back. She'll come back all right,"
she continued for Gray's encouragement. [117]
  He met it with proper interest. "I'm sure I hope so!"
  "Well, don't be too sure!" his uncle judiciously said.
  "Oh he has only borrowed her." Miss Goodenough smoothed it down even as she
smoothed Mr Betterman's sheet, while with the same movement of her head she
wafted Gray to the door.
  "Mr Gaw," her patient returned, "has borrowed from me before. Mr Gaw,
Graham---!"
  "Yes sir?" said Gray with the door ajar and his hand on the knob.
  The fine old presence on the pillow had faltered before expression; then it
appeared rather sighingly and finally to give the question up. "Well, Mr Gaw's
an abyss."
  Gray found himself suddenly responsive. "_Isn't_ he, the strange man?"
  "The strange man -- that's it." This summary description sufficed now to
Mr Betterman's achieved indifference. "But you've seen him?"
  "Just for an instant."
  "And that was enough?"
  "Well, I don't know." Gray himself gave it up. "You're _all_ so fiercely
interesting!"
  "I think Rosanna's lovely!" Miss Goodenough contributed, to all appearance
as an attenuation, while she tucked their companion in.
  "Oh Miss Gaw's quite another matter," our young man still paused long enough
to reply. [118]
  "Well, I don't mean but what she's interesting in her way too," Miss
Goodenough's conscience prompted.
  "Oh he knows all about her. That's all right," Mr Betterman remarked for his
nurse's benefit.
  "Why of course I know it," this lady candidly answered. "Miss Mumby and
I have had to feel _that_. I guess he'll want to send her his love," she
continued across to Gray.
  "To Miss Mumby?" asked Gray, his general bewilderment having moments of
aggravation.
  "Why no -- _she's_ sure of his affection. To Miss Gaw. Don't you want," she
inquired of her patient, "to send your love to that poor anxious girl?"
  "Is she anxious?" Gray returned in advance of his uncle.
  Miss Goodenough hung fire but a moment. "Well, I guess I'd be in her place.
But you'll see."
  "Then," said Gray to his host, "if Rosanna's in trouble I'll go to her at
once."
  The old man, at this, once more delivered himself. "She won't be in trouble
-- any more than I am. But tell her -- tell her---!"
  "Yes, sir" -- Gray had again to wait.
  But Miss Goodenough now would have no more of it. "Tell her that _we're_
about as fresh as we can live!" -- the wave of her hand accompanying which
Gray could take at last for his dismissal.

[119]
                             -=-=-  3  -=-=-

It was nevertheless not at once that he sought out the way to find his old
friend; other questions than that of at once seeing her hummed for the
next half-hour about his ears -- an interval spent by him in still further
contemplative motion within his uncle's grounds. He strolled and stopped again
and stared before him without seeing; he came and went and sat down on benches
and low rocky ledges only to get up and pace afresh; he lighted cigarettes but
to smoke them a quarter out and then chuck them away to light others. He said
to himself that he was enormously agitated, agitated as never in his life
before, but that, strangely enough, he disliked that condition far less than
the menace of it would have made him suppose. He didn't, however, like it
enough to say to himself 'This is happiness!' -- as could scarcely have failed
if the kind of effect on his nerves had really consorted with the kind of
advantage that he was to understand his interview with his uncle to have
promised him; so far, that is, as he was yet to understand anything. His
after-sense of the scene expanded rather than settled, became an impression of
one of those great insistent bounties that are not of this troubled world; the
anomaly expressing itself in such beauty and dignity, with all its elements
conspiring together, as would have done [120] honour to a great page of
literary, of musical or pictorial art. The huge grace of the matter ought
somehow to have left him simply captivated -- so at least, all wondering, he
hung about there to reflect; but excess of harmony might apparently work like
excess of discord, might practically be a negation of the idea of the quiet
life. Ignoble quiet he had never asked for -- this he could now with assurance
remember; but something in the pitch of his uncle's guarantee of big things,
whatever they were, which should at the same time be pleasant things, seemed
to make him an accomplice in some boundless presumption. In what light had he
ever seen himself that made it proper the pleasant should be so big for him or
the big so pleasant? Suddenly, as he looked at his watch and saw how the time
had passed -- time already, didn't it seem, of his rather standing off and
quaking? -- it occurred to him that the last thing he had proposed to himself
in the whole connection was to be either publicly or privately afraid; in the
act of noting which he became aware again of Miss Mumby, who, having come out
of the house apparently to approach him, was now at no great distance. She
rose before him the next minute as in fuller possession than ever of his fate,
and yet with no accretion of reserve in her own pleasure at this.
  "What I want you to do is just to go over to Miss Gaw." [121]
  "It's just what _I_ should like, thank you -- and perhaps you'll be so good
as to show me the way." He wasn't quite succeeding in not being afraid -- that
a moment later came to him; since if this extraordinary woman was in touch
with his destiny what did such words on his own part represent but the impulse
to cling to her and, as who should say, keep on her right side? His uncle had
spoken to him of Rosanna as protective -- and what better warrant for such a
truth than that here was he thankful on the spot even for the countenance of a
person speaking apparently in her name? All of which was queer enough, verily
-- since it came to the sense of his clutching for immediate light, through
the now gathered dusk, at the surge of guiding petticoats, the charity of
women more or less strange. Miss Mumby at once took charge of him, and he
learnt more things still before they had proceeded far. One of these truths,
though doubtless the most superficial, was that Miss Gaw proposed he should
dine with her just as he was -- he himself recognising that with her father
suddenly and to all appearance gravely ill it was no time for vain forms.
Wasn't the rather odd thing, none the less, that the crisis should have
suggested her desiring company? -- being as it was so acute that the doctor,
Doctor Hatch himself, would even now have arrived with a nurse, both of which
pair of ears Miss Mumby required for her report of those symptoms in their
[122] new patient that had appealed to her practised eye an hour before.
Interesting enough withal was her explanation to Gray of what she had noted
on Mr Gaw's part as a consequence of her joining them at that moment under
Mr Betterman's roof; all the more that he himself had then wondered and
surmised -- struck as he was with the effect on the poor man's nerves of their
visitor's announcement that her prime patient had brightened. Mr Gaw but too
truly, our young man now learned, had taken that news ill -- as, given the
state of his heart, any strong shock might determine a bad aggravation. Such
a shock Miss Mumby had, to her lively regret, administered, though she called
Gray's attention to the prompt and intelligent action of her remorse. Feeling
at once responsible she had taken their extraordinary little subject in charge
-- with every care indeed not to alarm him; to the point that, on his absolute
refusal to let her go home with him and his arresting a hack, on the public
road, which happened to come into view empty, the two had entered the vehicle
and she had not lost sight of him till, his earnest call upon his daughter at
Mrs Bradham's achieved, he had been in effect restored to his own house. His
daughter, who lived with her eyes on his liability to lapses, was now watching
with him, and was well aware, Miss Mumby averred, of what the crisis might
mean; as to whose own due presence of mind in the connection [123] indeed
how could there be better proof than this present lucidity of her appeal to
Mr Betterman's guest on such a matter as her prompt thought for sparing him
delay?
  "If she didn't want you to wait to dress, it can only be, I guess, to make
sure of seeing you before anything happens," his guide was at no loss to
remark; "and if she _can_ mention dinner while the old gentleman is -- well,
_as_ he is -- it shows she's not too beside herself to feel that you'll at any
rate want yours."
  "Oh for mercy's sake don't talk of dinner!" Gray pulled up under the
influence of these revelations quite impatiently to request. "That's not what
I'm most thinking of, I beg you to believe, in the midst of such prodigies
and portents." They had crossed the small stretch of road which separated
Mr Betterman's gate from that of the residence they were addressed to; and
now, within the grounds of this latter, which loomed there, through vague
boskages, with an effect of windows numerously and precipitately lighted, the
forces of our young friend's consciousness were all in vibration at once. "My
wondrous uncle, I don't mind telling you, since you're so kind to me, has
given me more extraordinary things to think of than I see myself prepared in
any way to do justice to; and if I'm further to understand you that we have
between us, you and I, destroyed _this_ valuable life, I leave you to [124]
judge whether what we may have to face in consequence finds me eager."
  "How do you know it's such a valuable life?" Miss Mumby surprisingly
rejoined; sinking that question, however, in a livelier interest, before his
surprise could express itself. "If she has sent me for you it's because she
knows what she's about, and because I also know what I am -- so that, wanting
you myself so much to come, I guess I'd have gone over for you on my own
responsibility. Why, Mr Fielder, your place is right here _by_ her at such a
time as this, and if you don't already realise it I'm very glad I've helped
you."
  Such was the consecration under which, but a few minutes later, Gray found
himself turning about in the lamp-lit saloon of the Gaws very much as he had
a few hours before revolved at the other house. Miss Mumby had introduced him
into this apartment straight from the terrace to which, in the warm air, a
long window or two stood open, and then had left him with the assurance that
matters upstairs would now be in shape for their friend to join him at once.
It was perhaps because he had rather inevitably expected matters upstairs --
and this in spite of his late companion's warning word -- to assault him in
some fulness with Miss Gaw's appearance at the door, that a certain failure of
any such effect when she did appear had for him a force, even if it was hardly
yet to be called a sense, beyond any air of her [125] advancing on the tide of
pain. He fairly took in, face to face with her, that what she first called for
was no rattle of sound, however considerately pitched, about the question of
her own fear; she had pulled no long face, she cared for no dismal deference:
she but stood there, after she had closed the door with a backward push that
took no account, in the hushed house, of some possible resonance, she but
stood there smiling in her mild extravagance of majesty, smiling and smiling
as he had seen women do as a preface to bursting into tears. He was to
remember afterwards how he had felt for an instant that whatever he said or
did would deprive her of resistance to an inward pressure which was growing as
by the sight of him, but that she would thus break down much more under the
crowned than under the menaced moment -- thanks to which appearance what could
be stranger than his inviting her to clap her hands? Still again was he later
to recall that these hands had been the moment after held in his own while he
knew himself smiling too and his own while saying: "Well, well, well, what
wonders and what splendours!" and seeing that though there was even more of
her in presence than he had reckoned there was somehow less of her in time; as
if she had at once grown and grown and grown, grown in all sorts of ways save
the most natural one of growing visibly older. Such an oddity as that made her
another person a good deal more than [126] her show of not having left him
behind by any break with their common youth could keep her the same.
  These perceptions took of course but seconds, with yet another on their
heels, to the effect that she had already seen him, and seen him to some
fine sense of pleasure, as himself enormously different -- arriving at that
clearness before they had done more than thus waver between the 'fun', all
so natural, of their meeting as the frankest of friends and the quite other
intelligence of their being parties to a crisis. It was to remain on record
for him too, and however overscored, that their crisis, surging up for three
or four minutes by its essential force, suffered them to stand there, with
irrelevant words and motions, very much as if it were all theirs alone and
nobody's else, nobody's more important, on either side, than they were, and so
take a brush from the wing of personal romance. He let her hands go, and then,
if he wasn't mistaken, held them afresh a moment in repeated celebration, he
exchanged with her the commonest remarks and the flattest and the easiest,
so long as it wasn't speaking but seeing, and seeing more and more, that
mattered: they literally talked of his journey and his arrival and of whether
he had had a good voyage and wasn't tired; they said "You sit here, won't
you?" and "Shan't you be better there?" -- they said "Oh I'm all right!" and
"Fancy it's happening [127] after all like this!" before there even faintly
quavered the call of a deeper note. This was really because the deep one, from
minute to minute, was that acute hush of her so clearly finding him not a
bit what she might have built up. He had grown and grown just as she had,
certainly; only here he was for her clothed in the right interest of it, not
bare of that grace as he fancied her guessing herself in his eyes, and with
the conviction sharply thrust upon him, beyond any humour he might have
cultivated, that he was going to be so right for her and so predetermined,
whatever he did and however he should react there under conditions
incalculable, that this would perhaps more overload his consciousness than
ease it. It could have been further taken for strange, had there been somebody
so to note it, that even when their first vaguenesses dropped what she really
at once made easiest for him was to tell her that _the_ wonderful thing had
come to pass, the thing she had whisked him over for -- he put it to her that
way; that it had taken place in conditions too exquisite to be believed, and
that under the bewilderment produced by these she must regard him as still
staggering.
  "Then it's done, then it's done -- as I knew it would be if he could but see
you." Flushed, but with her large fan held up so that scarce more than her
eyes, their lids drawn together in the same near-sighted way he remembered,
presented [128] themselves over it, she fairly hunched her high shoulders
higher for emphasis of her success. The more it might have embarrassed her to
consider him without reserve the more she had this relief, as he took it, of
her natural, her helpful blinking; so that what it came to really for her
general advantage was that the fine closing of the eyes, _the_ fine thing in
her big face, but expressed effective scrutiny. Below her in stature -- as
various other men, for that matter, couldn't but be -- he hardly came higher
than her ear; and he for the shade of an instant struck himself as a small
boy, literally not of man's estate, reporting, under some research, just to
the amplest of mothers. He had reported to Mr Betterman, so far as intent
candour in him hadn't found itself distraught, and for the half hour had
somehow affronted the immeasurable; but that didn't at all prevent his now
quick sense of his never in his life having been so watched and waited upon by
the uncharted infinite, or so subject to its operation -- since infinites, at
the rate he was sinking in, _could_ apparently operate, and do it too without
growing smaller for the purpose. He cast about, not at all upright on the
small pink satin sofa to which he had unconsciously dropped; it was for _him_
clearly to grow bigger, as everything about expressively smiled, smiled
absolutely through the shadow cast by doctors and nurses again, in suggestion
of; which, naturally, was what one would [129] always want to do -- but which
any failure of, he after certain moments perfectly felt, wouldn't convert
to the least difference for this friend. How could that have been more
established than by her neglect of his having presently said, out of his
particular need, that he would do anything in reason that was asked of him,
but that he fairly ached with the desire to understand---? She blinked upon
his ache to her own sufficiency, no doubt; but no further balm dropped upon it
for the moment than by her appearing to brood with still deeper assurance, in
her place and her posture, on the beauty of the accomplished fact, the fact
of her performed purpose and her freedom now but to take care -- yes, herself
take care -- for what would come of it. She might understand that _he_ didn't
-- all the way as yet; but nothing could be more in the line of the mild and
mighty mother than her treating that as a trifle. It attenuated a little
perhaps, it just let light into the dark warmth of her spreading possession
of what she had done, that when he had said, as a thing already ten times on
his lips and now quite having to come out, "I feel some big mistake about me
somehow at work, and want to stop it in time!" she met this with the almost
rude decision of "There's nothing you can stop now, Graham, for your fate, or
our situation, has the gained momentum of a rush that began ever so far away
and that has been growing and growing. [130] It would be too late even if we
wanted to -- and you can judge for yourself how little that's my wish. So here
we are, you see, to make the best of it."
  "When you talk of my 'fate'," he allowed himself almost the amusement
of answering, "you freeze the current of my blood; but when you say 'our
situation', and that we're in it together, that's a little better, and I
assure you that I shall not for a moment stay in anything, whatever it may be,
in which you're not close beside me. So there _you_ are at any rate -- and I
matter at least as much as this, whatever the mistake: that I have hold of
you as tight as ever you've been held in your life, and that, whatever and
_whatever_ the mistake, you've got to see me through."
  "Well, I took my responsibility years ago, and things came of it" -- so she
made reply; "and the other day I took this other, and now _this_ has come of
it, and that was what I wanted, and wasn't afraid of, and am not afraid of
now -- like the fears that came to me after the Dresden time." No more direct
than that was her answer to his protest, and what she subjoined still took
as little account of it. "I rather lost them, those old fears -- little by
little; but one of the things I most wanted the other day was to see whether
before you here they wouldn't wholly die down. They're over, they're over,"
she repeated; "I knew three minutes of you would do it -- and not a ghost of
them remains." [131]
  "I can't be anything but glad that you shouldn't have fears -- and it's
horrid to me to learn, I assure you," he said, "that I've ever been the
occasion of any. But the extent to which," he then frankly laughed, "'three
minutes' of me seems to be enough for people---!"
  He left it there, just throwing up his arms, passive again as he had
accepted his having to be in the other place; but conscious more and more of
the anomaly of her showing so markedly at such an hour a preoccupation, and of
the very intensest, that should not have her father for its subject. Nothing
could have more represented this than her abruptly saying to him, without
recognition of his point just made, so far as it might have been a point: "If
your impression of your uncle, and of his looking so fine and being so able to
talk to you, makes you think he has any power really to pick up or to last, I
want you to know that you're wholly mistaken. It has kept him up," she went
on, "and the effect may continue a day or two more -- it _will_, in fact, till
certain things are done. But then the flicker will have dropped -- for he
won't want it not to. He'll feel all right. The extraordinary inspiration, the
borrowed force, will have spent itself -- it will die down and go out, but
with no pain. There has been at no time much of that," she said, "and now I'm
positively assured there's none. It can't come back -- nothing can but the
weakness. It's [132] too lovely," she remarkably added -- "so there indeed and
indeed we are."
  To take in these words was to be, after a fashion he couldn't have
expressed, on a basis of reality with her the very rarest and queerest; so
that, bristling as it did with penetrative points, her speech left him scarce
knowing for the instant which penetrated furthest. That she made no more of
anything he himself said than if she had just sniffed it as a pale pink rose
and then tossed it into the heap of his other sweet futilities, such another
heap as had seemed to grow up for him in his uncle's room, this might have
pressed sharpest hadn't something else, not wholly overscored by what
followed, perhaps pricked his consciousness most. "'It', you say, has kept him
up? May I ask you what 'it' then may so wonderfully have been?"
  She had no more objection to say than she apparently had difficulty. "Why,
his having let me get at him. _That_ was to make the whole difference."
  It was somehow as much in the note of their reality as anything could well
be; which was perhaps why he could but respond with "Oh I see!" and remain
lolling a little with a sense of flatness -- a flatness moreover exclusively
his own.
  So without flatness of _her_ own she didn't even mind his; something in her
brushed quite above [133] it while she observed next, as if it were the most
important thing that now occurred to her: "That of course was my poor father's
mistake." And then as Gray but stared: "I mean the idea that he _can_ pick
up."
  "It's your father's mistake that _he_ can---?"
  She met it as if really a shade bewildered at his own misconception; she was
literally so far off from any vision of her parent in himself, a philosopher
might have said, that it took her an instant to do the question justice. "Oh
no -- I mean that your uncle can. It was your own report of that to him, with
Miss Mumby backing you, that put things in the bad light to him."
  "So bad a light that Mr Gaw is in danger by it?" This was catching on of a
truth to realities -- and most of all to the one he had most to face. "I've
been then at the bottom of that?"
  He was to wonder afterwards if she had very actually gone so far as to let
slip a dim smile for the intensity of his candour on this point, or whether
her so striking freedom from intensity in the general connection had but
suggested to him one of the images that were most in opposition. Her answer at
any rate couldn't have had more of the eminence of her plainness. "That you
yourself, after your uncertainties, should have found Mr Betterman surprising
was perfectly natural -- and how indeed could you have dreamed that father so
wanted him to die?" And then [134] as Gray, affected by the extreme salience
of this link in the chain of her logic, threw up his head a little for the
catching of his breath, her supreme lucidity, and which was lucidity all in
his interest, further shone out. "Father is indeed ill. He has had these bad
times before, but nothing quite of the present gravity. He has been in a
critical state for months, but one thing has kept him alive -- the wish to
see your uncle so far on his way that there could be no doubt. It was the
appearance of doubt so suddenly this afternoon that gave him the shock." She
continued to explain the case without prejudice. "To take it there from you
for possible that Mr Betterman might revive and that he should have in his own
so unsteady condition to wait was simply what father couldn't stand."
  "So that I just dealt the blow---?"
  But it was as if she cared too little even to try to make that right. "He
doesn't _want_, you see, to live after."
  "After having found he is mistaken?"
  She had a faint impatience. "He isn't of course really -- since what I told
you of your uncle is true. And he knows that now, having my word for it."
  Gray couldn't be clear enough about her clearness. "Your word for it that my
uncle has revived but for the moment?"
  "Absolutely. Wasn't my giving him that," Rosanna asked, "a charming filial
touch?" [135]
  This was tremendously much again to take in, but Gray's capacity grew.
"Promising him, you mean, for his benefit, that my uncle _shan't_ last?"
  The size of it on his lips might fairly, during the instant she looked
at him, have been giving her pleasure. "Yes, making it a bribe to father's
patience."
  "Then why doesn't the bribe act?"
  "Because it comes too late. It was amazing," she pursued, "that, feeling as
he did, he could take that drive to the Bradhams' -- and Miss Mumby was right
in perfectly understanding that. The harm was already done -- and there it
is."
  She had truly for the whole reference the most astounding tones. "You
literally mean then," said Gray, "that while you sit here with me he's dying
-- dying of my want of sense?"
  "You've no want of sense" -- she spoke as if this were the point really
involved. "You've a sense the most exquisite -- and surely you had best take
in soon rather than late," she went on, "how you'll never be free not to have
on every occasion of life to reckon with it and pay for it."
  "Oh I say!" was all the wit with which he could at once meet this charge;
but she had risen as she spoke and, with a remark about there being another
matter, had moved off to a piece of furniture at a distance where she appeared
to take something from a drawer unlocked with a sharp snap for the purpose.
When she returned to him [136] she had this object in her hand, and Gray
recognised in it an oblong envelope, addressed, largely sealed in black, and
seeming to contain a voluminous letter. She kept it while he noted that the
seal was intact, and she then reverted not to the discomfiture she had last
produced in him but to his rueful reference of a minute before that.
  "He's not dying of anything you said or did, or of anyone's act or words.
He's just dying of twenty millions."
  "Twenty millions?" There was a kind of enormity in her very absence of pomp,
and Gray felt as if he had dropped of a sudden, from his height of simplicity,
far down into a familiar relation to quantities inconceivable -- out of which
depths he fairly blew and splashed to emerge, the familiar relation, of all
things in the world, being so strange a one. "_That's_ what you mean here when
you talk of money?"
  "That's what we mean," said Rosanna, "when we talk of anything at all --
for of what else but money _do_ we ever talk? He's dying, at any rate," she
explained, "of his having wished to have to do with it on that sort of scale.
Having to do with it consists, you know, of the things you do _for_ it --
which are mostly very awful; and there are all kinds of consequences that they
eventually have. You pay by these consequences for what you have done, and
my father has been for a long time paying." Then she added as if of a sudden
[137] to summarise and dismiss the whole ugly truth: "The effect has been to
dry up his life." Her eyes, with this, reached away for the first time as in
search of something not at all before her, and it was on the perfunctory note
that she had the next instant concluded. "There's nothing at last left for him
to pay _with_."
  For Gray at least, whatever initiations he had missed, she couldn't keep
down the interest. "Mr Gaw then will _leave_ twenty millions---?"
  "He has already left them -- in the sense of having made his will; as your
uncle, equally to my knowledge, has already made his." Something visibly had
occurred to her, and in connection, it might seem, with the packet she had
taken from her drawer. She looked about -- there being within the scene, which
was somehow at once blank and replete, sundry small scattered objects of an
expensive negligibility; not one of which, till now, he could guess, had
struck her as a thing of human application. Human application had sprung up,
the idea of selection at once following, and she unmistakeably but wondered
what would be best for her use while she completed the statement on which she
had so strikingly embarked. "He has left me his whole fortune." Then holding
up an article of which she had immediately afterwards, with decision,
proceeded to possess herself, "Is _that_ a thing you could at all bear?" she
irrelevantly asked. She had caught sight, in her [138] embarrassed way, of
something apparently adapted to her unexplained end, and had left him afresh
to assure herself of its identity, taking up from a table at first, however, a
box in Japanese lacquer only to lay it down unsatisfied. She had circled thus
at a distance for a time, allowing him now _his_ free contemplation; she had
tried in succession, holding them close to her eyes, several embossed or
embroidered superfluities, a blotting-book covered with knobs of malachite, a
silver box, flat, largely circular and finely fretted, a gold cigar case of
absurd dimensions, of which she played for a moment the hinged lid. Such was
the object on which she puzzlingly challenged him.
  "I could bear it perhaps better if I ever used cigars."
  "You don't smoke?" she almost wailed.
  "Never cigars. Sometimes pipes -- but mostly, thank goodness, cigarettes."
  "Thank the powers then indeed!" -- and, the golden case restored to the
table, where she had also a moment before laid her prepared missive, she went
straight to a corner of the mantel-shelf, hesitations dropping from her, and,
opening there a plainer receptacle than any she had yet touched, turned the
next instant with a brace of cigarettes picked out and an accent she had not
yet used. "You _are_ a blessing, Gray -- I'm nowhere without one!" There were
matches at hand, and she had struck a light and applied it, at his lips,
to the [139] cigarette passively received by him, afterwards touching her
own with it, almost before he could wonder again at the oddity of their
transition. Their light smoke curled while she went back to her table; it
quickened for him with each puff the marvel of a domestic altar graced at such
a moment by the play of that particular flame. Almost, to his fine vision, it
made Rosanna different -- for wasn't there at once a gained ease in the tone
with which, her sealed letter still left lying on the table, she returned to
that convenience for the pocket of the rich person of which she had clicked
and re-clicked the cover? What strange things, Gray thought, rich persons had!
-- and what strange things they did, he might mentally even have added, when
she developed in a way that mystified him but the more: "I don't mean for
your cigars, since you don't use them; but I want you to have from my hand
something in which to keep, with all due consideration, a form of tribute that
has been these last forty-eight hours awaiting you here, and which, it occurs
to me, would just slide into this preposterous piece of furniture and nestle
there till you may seem to feel you want it." She proceeded to recover the
packet and slide it into the case, the shape of which, on a larger scale, just
corresponded with its own, and then, once more making the lid catch, shook
container and contents as sharply as she might have shaken a bottle of
medicine. "So -- there [140] it is; I somehow don't want just to thrust at you
the letter itself."
  "But may I be told what the letter itself _is_?" asked Gray, who had
followed these movements with interest.
  "Why of course -- didn't I mention? Here are safely stowed," she said, her
gesture causing the smooth protective surfaces to twinkle more brightly before
him, "the very last lines (and many there appear to be of them!) that, if
am not mistaken, my father's hand will have traced. He wrote them, in your
interest, as he considers, when he heard of your arrival in New York, and,
having sealed and directed them, gave them to me yesterday to take care of and
deliver to you. I put them away for the purpose, and an hour ago, during our
drive back from Mrs Bradham's, he reminded me of my charge. Before asking Miss
Mumby to tell you I should like to see you I transferred the letter from its
place of safety in my room to the cabinet from which, for your benefit, I a
moment ago took it. I carefully comply, as you see, with my father's request.
I know nothing whatever of what he has written you, and only want you to have
his words. But I want also," she pursued, "to make just this little affair of
them. I want" -- and she bent her eyes on the queer costliness, rubbing it
with her pocket-handkerchief -- "to do what the Lord Mayor of London does,
doesn't he? when he offers the Freedom [141] of the City; present them in a
precious casket in which they may always abide. I want in short," she wound
up, "to put them, for your use, beautifully away."
  Gray went from wonder to wonder. "It isn't then a thing you judge I should
open at once?"
  "I don't care whether you never open it in your life. But you don't, I can
see, like _that_ vulgar thing!" With which having opened her receptacle and
drawn forth from it the subject of her attention she tossed back to its place
on the spread of brocade the former of these trifles. The big black seal,
under this discrimination, seemed to fix our young man with a sombre eye.
  "Is there any objection to my just looking at the letter now?" And then when
he had taken it and yet was on the instant and as by the mere feel and the
nearer sight, rather less than more conscious of a free connection with it,
"Is it going to be bad for me?" he said.
  "Find out for yourself!"
  "Break the seal?"
  "Isn't it meant to break?" she asked with a shade of impatience.
  He noted the impatience, sounding her nervousness, but saw at the same time
that her interest in the communication, whatever it might be, was of the
scantest, and that she suffered from having to defer to his own. "If I needn't
answer to-night---!" [142]
  "You needn't answer ever."
  "Oh well then it can wait. But you're right -- it mustn't just wait in my
pocket."
  This pleased her. "As I say, it must have a place of its own."
  He considered of that. "You mean that when I _have_ read it I may still want
to treasure it?"
  She had in hand again the great fan that hung by a long fine chain from her
girdle, and, flaring it open, she rapidly closed it again, the motion seeming
to relieve her. "I mean that my father has written you at this end of his days
-- and that that's all I know about it."
  "You asked him no question---?"
  "As to why he should write? I wouldn't," said Rosanna, "have asked him for
the world. It's many a day since we've done that, either he or I -- at least
when a question could have a sense."
  "Thank you then," Gray smiled, "for answering mine." He looked about him for
whatever might still help them, and of a sudden had a light. "Why the ivory
tower!" And while her eyes followed: "That beautiful old thing on the top of
the secretary -- happy thought if it _is_ old!" He had seen at a glance that
this object was what they wanted, and, a nearer view confirming the thought,
had reached for it and taken it down. "There it was waiting for you. _Isn't_
it an ivory tower, and doesn't living in an ivory tower just mean the most
distinguished retirement? I don't [143] want yet awhile to settle in one
myself -- though I've always thought it a thing I should like to come to;
but till I do make acquaintance with what you have for me a retreat for the
mystery is pleasant to think of." Such was the fancy he developed while he
delicately placed his happy find on the closed and polished lid of the grand
piano, where the rare surface reflected the pale rich ivory and his companion
could have it well before her. The subject of this attention might indeed
pass, by a fond conceit, on its very reduced scale, for a builded white-walled
thing, very tall in proportion to the rest of its size and rearing its head
from its rounded height as if a miniature flag might have flown there. It was
a remarkable product of some eastern, probably some Indian, patience, and of
some period as well when patience in such causes was at the greatest -- thanks
to which Gray, loving ancient artistry and having all his life seen much of
it, had recognised at a glance the one piece in the room that presented an
interest. It consisted really of a cabinet, of easily moveable size, seated in
a circular socket of its own material and equipped with a bowed door, which
dividing in the middle, after a minute gold key had been turned, showed a
superposition of small drawers that went upwards diminishing in depth, so that
the topmost was of least capacity. The high curiosity of the thing was in the
fine work required for making and keeping it perfectly circular; [144] an
effect arrived at by the fitting together, apparently by tiny golden rivets,
of numerous small curved plates of the rare substance, each of these,
including those of the two wings of the exquisitely convex door, contributing
to the artful, the total rotundity. The series of encased drawers worked to
and fro of course with straight sides, but also with small bowed fronts,
these made up of the same adjusted plates. The whole, its infinite neatness
exhibited, proved a wonder of wasted ingenuity, and Rosanna, pronouncing
herself stupid not to have anticipated him, rendered all justice, under her
friend's admiring emphasis, to this choicest of her resources. Of how they had
come by it, either she or her sparing parent, she couldn't at once bethink
herself: on their taking the Newport house for the few weeks her direction had
been general that an assortment of odds and ends from New York should disperse
itself, for mitigation of bleakness, in as many of the rooms as possible; and
with quite different matters to occupy her since she had taken the desired
effect for granted. Her father's condition had precluded temporary inmates,
and with Gray's arrival also in mind she had been scarce aware of minor
importances. "Of course you know -- I knew you _would_!" were the words in
which she assented to his preference for the ivory tower and which settled for
him, while he made it beautifully slide, the fact that the shallowest of the
drawers would [145] exactly serve for his putting his document to sleep. So
then he slipped it in, rejoicing in the tight fit of the drawer, carefully
making the two divisions of the protective door meet, turning the little gold
key in its lock and finally, with his friend's permission, attaching the key
to a small silver ring carried in his pocket and serving for a cluster of
others. With this question at rest it seemed at once, and as with an effect
out of proportion to the cause, that a great space before them had been
cleared: they looked at each other over it as if they had become more
intimate, and as if now, in the free air, the enormities already named loomed
up again. All of which was expressed in Gray's next words.
  "May I ask you, in reference to something you just now said, whether
my uncle took action for leaving me money before our meeting could be in
question? Because if he did, you know, I understand less than ever. That he
should want to see me if he was thinking of me, that of course I can conceive;
but that he shouldn't wait till he had seen me is what I find extraordinary."
  If she gave him the impression of keeping her answer back a little, it
wasn't, he was next to see, that she was not fully sure of it. "He _had_ seen
you."
  "You mean as a small boy?"
  "No -- at this distance of time that didn't count." She had another wait,
but also another assurance. "He had seen you in the great fact about you."
[146]
  "And what in the world do you call that?"
  "Why, that you are more out of it all, out of the air he has breathed all
his life and that in these last years has more and more sickened him, than
anyone else in the least belonging to him, that he could possibly put his hand
on."
  He stood before her with his hands in his pockets -- he could study her now
quite as she had studied himself. "The extent, Rosanna, to which you must have
answered for me!"
  She met his scrutiny from between more narrowed lids. "I did put it all to
him -- I spoke for you as earnestly as one can ever speak for another. But
you're not to gather from it," she thus a trifle awkwardly smiled, "that I
have let you in for twenty millions, or for anything approaching. He will have
left you, by my conviction, all he has; but he has nothing at all like that.
That's all I'm sure of -- of no details whatever. Even my father doesn't
know," she added; "in spite of its having been for a long time the thing
he has most wanted to, most sat here, these weeks, on some chance of his
learning. The truth, I mean, of Mr Betterman's affairs."
  Gray felt a degree of relief at the restrictive note on his expectations
which might fairly have been taken, by its signs, for a betrayed joy in their
extent. The air had really, under Rosanna's touch, darkened itself with
numbers; but what she had just admitted was a rift of light. In this [147]
light, which was at the same time that of her allusion to Mr Gaw's unappeased
appetite, his vision of that gentleman at the other house came back to him,
and he said in a moment: "I see, I see. He tried to get some notion out of
me."
  "Poor father!" she answered to this -- but without time for more questions,
as at the moment she spoke the door of the room opened and Doctor Hatch
appeared. He paused, softly portentous, where he stood, and so he met
Rosanna's eyes. He held them a few seconds, and the effect was to press in
her, to all appearance, the same spring our young man had just touched. "Poor,
poor, poor father!" she repeated, but as if brought back to him from far away.
She took in what had happened, but not at once nor without an effort what it
called on her for; so that "Won't you come up?" her informant had next to ask.
  To this, while Gray watched her, she rallied -- "If you'll stay here." With
which, looking at neither of them again, as the Doctor kept the door open, she
passed out, he then closing it on her and transferring his eyes to Gray -- who
hadn't to put a question, so sharply did the raised and dropped hands signify
that all was over. The fact, in spite of everything, startled our young man,
who had with his companion a moment's mute exchange.
  "He has died while I've kept her here?" [148]
  Doctor Hatch just demurred. "You kept her through her having sent for you to
talk to you."
  "Yes, I know. But it's very extraordinary!"
  "You seem to _make_ people extraordinary. You've made your uncle, you
know---!"
  "Yes indeed -- but haven't I made _him_ better?" Gray asked.
  The Doctor again for a moment hesitated. "Yes -- in the sense that he must
be now at last really resting. But I go back to him."
  "I'll go with you of course," said Gray, looking about for his hat. As he
found it he oddly remembered. "Why she asked me to dinner!"
  It all but amused the Doctor. "You inspire remarkable efforts."
  "Well, I'm incapable of making them." It seemed now queer enough. "I can't
stay to dinner."
  "Then we'll go." With which however, Doctor Hatch was not too preoccupied to
have had his attention, within the minute, otherwise taken. "What a splendid
piece!" he exclaimed in presence of the ivory tower.
  "It _is_ splendid," said Gray, feeling its beauty again the brightest note
in the strangeness; but with a pang of responsibility to it taking him too.
"Miss Gaw has made me a present of it."
  "Already? You do work them!" -- and the good physician fairly grazed again
the act of mirth. "So you'll take it away?" [149]
  Gray paused a moment before his acquisition, which seemed to have begun to
guard, within the very minute, a secret of greater weight. Then "No, I'll come
back to it," he said as they departed by the long window that opened to the
grounds and through which Miss Mumby had brought him in.


                           B O O K   T H I R D

[150]
                             -=-=-  1  -=-=-

"Why I haven't so much as seen him yet," Cissy perforce confessed to her
friend, Mrs Bradham's friend, everybody's friend, even, already and so
coincidentally, Graham Fielder's; this recipient of her avowal having motored
that day from Boston, after detention there under a necessity of business and
the stress of intolerable heat, but having reached Newport in time for tea,
a bath, a quick 'change' and a still quicker impression of blest refreshment
from the fine air and from various other matters. He had come forth again,
during the time left him between these performed rites and the more formal
dressing-hour, in undisguised quest of our young lady, who had so disposed
certain signs of her whereabouts that he was to waste but few steps in
selection of a short path over the longest stretch of lawn and the mass of
seaward rocks forming its limit. Arriving to spend with the Bradhams as many
or as few days as the conditions to be recognised [151] on the spot might
enjoin, this hero, Horton Vint, had alighted at one of those hours of
brilliant bustle which could show him as all in his element if he chose to
appear so, or could otherwise appeal at once to his perfect aptitude for the
artful escape and the undetected counterplot. But the pitch had by that moment
dropped and the company dispersed, so far as the quarter before him was
concerned: the tennis-ground was a velvet void, the afternoon breeze conveyed
soft nothings -- all of which made his occasion more spacious for Horton.
Cissy, from below, her charmingly cool cove, had watchfully signalled up, and
they met afresh, on the firm clear sand where the drowsy waves scarce even
lapsed, with forms of intimacy that the sequestered spot happily favoured. The
sense of waiting understood and crowned gave grace to her opened arms when the
young man, as he was still called, erect, slim, active, brightly refreshed
and, like herself, given the temperature, inconsiderably attired, first showed
himself against the sky; it had cost him but a few more strides and steps, an
easy descent, to spring to her welcome with the strongest answering emphasis.
They met as on ground already so prepared that not an uncertainty, on either
side, could make reunion less brave or confidence less fine; they had to
effect no clearance, to stand off from no risk; and, observing them thus in
their freedom, you might well have asked yourself by what infallible [152]
tact they had mastered for intercourse such perfect reciprocities of address.
You would certainly have concluded to their entire confidence in these. "With
a dozen people in the house it _is_ luck," Horton had at once appreciatively
said; but when their fellow-visitors had been handled between them for a
minute or so only to collapse again like aproned puppets on removal of
pressure from the squeak, he had jumped to the question of Gray Fielder and to
frank interest in Cissy's news of him. This news, the death of Mr Betterman
that morning, quite sufficiently explained her inability to produce the more
direct impression; that worthy's nephew and heir, in close and more and more
quickened attendance on him during the previous days, had been seen as yet,
to the best of her belief, by no one at all but dear Davey -- not counting of
course Rosanna Gaw, of the fact of whose own bereavement as well Horton was
naturally in possession, and who had made it possible, she understood, for
their friend to call on Graham.
  "Oh Davey has called on Graham?" Horton was concerned to ask while they
sat together on a rude worn slab. "What then, if he has told you, was his
particular idea?"
  "Won't his particular idea," Cissy returned, "be exactly the one he won't
have told me? What he did speak to me of yesterday morning, and what I told
him I thought would be beautiful [153] of him, was his learning by inquiry, in
case your friend could see him, whether there was any sort of thing he could
do for him in his possible want of a man to put a hand on. Because poor
Rosanna, for all one thinks of her," said the girl, "isn't exactly a man."
  Horton's attention was deeply engaged; his hands, a little behind him,
rested, as props to his slight backward inclination, on the convenient stone;
his legs, extended before him, enabled him to dig in his heels a little, while
his eyes, attached to the stretch of sea commanded by their rocky retreat,
betrayed a fixed and quickened vision. Rich in fine lines and proportions was
his handsome face -- with scarce less, moreover, to be said of his lean, light
and long-drawn, though so much more pointed and rounded figure. His features,
after a manner of their own, announced an energy and composed an array that
his expression seemed to disavow, or at least to be indifferent to, and had
the practical effect of toning down; as if he had been conscious that his
nose, of the bravest, strongest curve and intrinsically a great success, was
too bold and big for its social connections, that his mouth protested or at
least asserted more than he cared to back it up to, that his chin and jaw were
of too tactless an importance, and his fine eyes, above all, which suggested
choice samples of the more or less precious stone called aquamarine, too
disposed to darken with the [154] force of a straight look -- so that the
right way to treat such an excess of resource had become for him quite the
incongruous way, the cultivation of every sign and gage that liberties _might_
be taken with him. He seemed to keep saying that he was not, temperamentally
and socially, in his own exaggerated style, and that a bony structure, for
instance, as different as possible from the one he unfortunately had to
flaunt, would have been no less in harmony with his real nature than he sought
occasion to show it was in harmony with his conduct. His hard mouth sported,
to its visible relief and the admiration of most beholders, a beautiful
mitigating moustache; his eyes wandered and adventured as for fear of their
very own stare; his smile and his laugh went all lengths, you would almost
have guessed, in order that nothing less pleasant should occupy the ground;
his chin advanced upon you with a grace fairly tantamount to the plea, absurd
as that might have seemed, that it was in the act of receding. Thus you gained
the impression -- or could do so if your fancy quickened to him -- that
he would perhaps rather have been as unwrought and unfinished as so many
monstrous men, on the general peopled scene of those climes, appeared more and
more to show themselves, than appointed to bristle with a group of accents
that, for want of a sense behind them, could attach themselves but to a group
of blanks. The sense behind the [155] outward man in Horton Vint bore no
relation, it incessantly signified, to his being _importantly_ good-looking;
it was in itself as easily and freely human a sense, making as much for
personal reassurance, as the appeal of opportunity in an enjoying world could
ever have drawn forth and with the happy appearance of it confirmed by the
whimsical, the quite ironic, turn given by the society in which he moved
to the use of his name. It could never have been so pronounced and written
Haughty if in spite of superficial accidents his charming clever humility and
sociability hadn't thoroughly established themselves. He lived in the air of
jokes, and yet an air in which bad ones fell flat; and there couldn't have
been a worse one than to treat his designation as true.
  It might have been, at the same time, scarce in the least as a joke that
he presently said, in return for the remark on Cissy's part last reported:
"Rosanna is surely enough of a man to be much more of one than Davey.
However," he went on, "we agree, don't we? about the million of men it would
have taken to handle Gussy. A Davey the more or the less, or with a shade more
or less of the different sufficiency, would have made no difference in _that_
question" -- which had indeed no interest for them anyhow, he conveyed,
compared with the fun apparently proposed by this advent of old Gray. That,
frankly, was to him, Horton, as amusing a thing as could have happened [156]
-- at a time when if it hadn't been for Cissy's herself happening to be for
him, by exception, a comfort to think of, there wasn't a blest thing in his
life of the smallest interest. "It hadn't struck me as probable at all, this
revulsion of the old man's," he mentioned, "and though Fielder must be now an
awfully nice chap, whom you'll like and find charming, I own I didn't imagine
he would come so tremendously forward. Over there, simply with his tastes, his
'artistic interests', or literary ones, or whatever -- I mean his array of
intellectual resources and lack of any others -- he was well enough, by my
last impression, and I liked him both for his decent life and ways and for his
liking _me_, if you can believe it, so extraordinarily much as he seemed to.
What the situation appears most to mean, however, is that of a sudden he pops
into a real light, a great blazing light visible from afar -- which is quite a
different affair. It can't not mean at least all sorts of odd things -- or one
has a right to wonder if it _mayn't_ mean them." And Horton might have been
taken up for a minute of silence with his consideration of some of these
glimmering possibilities; a moment during which Cissy Foy maintained their
association by fairly, by quite visibly breathing with him in unison -- after
a fashion that testified more to her interest than any 'cutting in' could
have done. It would have been clear that they were far beyond any stage of
association at which [157] their capacity for interest in the contribution of
either to what was between them should depend upon verbal proof. It depended
in fact as little on any other sort, such for instance as searching eyes might
invoke; she hadn't to look at her friend to follow him further -- she but
looked off to those spaces where his own vision played, and it was by pressing
him close _there_ that she followed. Her companion's imagination, by the time
he spoke again, might verily have travelled far.
  "What comes to me is just the wonder of whether such a change of fortune may
possibly not spoil him -- he was so right and nice as he was. I remember he
used really to exasperate me almost by seeming not to have wants, unless
indeed it was by having only those that could be satisfied over there as a
kind of matter of course and that were those I didn't myself have -- in any
degree at least that could make up for the non-satisfaction of my others.
I suppose it amounted really," said Horton, "to the fact that, being each
without anything to speak of in our pockets, or then any prospect of anything,
he accepted that because he happened to like most the pleasures that were not
expensive. I on my side raged at my inability to meet or to cultivate expense
-- which seemed to me good and happy, quite the thing most worth while, in
itself: as for that matter it still seems. '_La lecture et la promenade_',
which old Roulet, our pasteur at Neuch^atel used so to enjoin on us [158] as
the highest joys, really appealed to Gray, to all appearance, in the sense
in which Roulet regarded, or pretended to regard, them -- once he could have
pictures and music and talk, which meant of course pleasant people, thrown in.
He could go in for such things on his means -- ready as he was to do all his
travelling on foot (I wanted as much then to do all mine on horseback), and to
go to the opera or the play in the shilling seats when he couldn't go in the
stalls. I loathed so everything _but_ the stalls -- the stalls everywhere in
life -- that if I couldn't have it that way I didn't care to have it at all.
So when I think it strikes me I must have liked him very much not to have
wanted to slay him -- for I don't remember having given way at any particular
moment to threats or other aggressions. That may have been because I felt
he rather extravagantly liked me -- as I shouldn't at all wonder at his
still doing. At the same time if I had found him beyond a certain point
objectionable his showing he took me for anything wonderful would have been,
I think," the young man reflected, "but an aggravation the more. However that
may be, I'm bound to say, I shan't in the least resent his taking me for
whatever he likes now -- if he can at all go on with it himself I shall be
able to hold up my end. The dream of my life, if you must know all, dear --
the dream of my life has been to be admired, _really_ admired, admired for all
he's worth, by some [159] awfully rich man. Being admired by a rich woman even
isn't so good -- though I've tried for that too, as you know, and equally
failed of it; I mean in the sense of their being ready to do it for all _they_
are worth. I've only had it from the poor, haven't I? -- and we've long since
had to recognise, haven't we? how little that has done for either of us." So
Horton continued -- so, as if incited and agreeably, irresistibly inspired, he
played, in the soft stillness and the protected nook, before the small salt
tide that idled as if to listen, with old things and new, with actualities and
possibilities, on top of the ancientries, that seemed to want but a bit of
talking of in order to flush and multiply. "There's one thing at any rate I'll
be hanged if I shall allow," he wound up; "I'll be hanged if what we may do
for him shall -- by any consent of mine at least -- spoil him for the old
relations without inspiring him for the new. He shan't become if I can help it
as beastly vulgar as the rest of us."
  The thing was said with a fine sincere ring, but it drew from Cissy a kind
of quick wail of pain. "Oh, oh, oh -- what a monstrous idea, Haughty, that he
possibly _could_, ever!"
  It had an immediate, even a remarkable effect; it made him turn at once to
look at her, giving his lightest pleasantest laugh, than which no sound of
that sort equally manful had less of mere male stridency. Then it made him,
with a change of [160] posture, shift his seat sufficiently nearer to her to
put his arm round her altogether and hold her close, pressing his cheek a
moment, with due precautions, against her hair. "That's awfully nice of you.
We _will_ pull something off. Is what you're thinking of what your friend out
there _dans le temps_, the stepfather, Mr Wendover, was it? told you about him
in that grand manner?"
  "Of course it is," said Cissy in lucid surrender and as if this truth were
of a flatness almost to blush for. "Don't you know I fell so in love with
Mr Northover, whose name you mispronounce, that I've kept true to him forever,
and haven't been really in love with you in the least, and shall never be with
Gray himself, however much I may want to, or you perhaps may even try to make
me? -- any more than I shall ever be with anyone else. What's inconceivable,"
she explained, "is that anyone that dear delicious man thought good enough to
talk of to me as he talked of his stepson should be capable of anything in the
least disgusting in any way."
  "I see, I see." It made Horton, for reasons, hold her but the closer -- yet
not withal as if prompted by her remarks to affectionate levity. It was a sign
of the intercourse of this pair that, move each other though they might to
further affection, and therewith on occasion to a congruous gaiety, they
treated no cause and no effect of that sort as waste; they had somehow already
so [161] worked off, in their common interest, all possible mistakes and vain
imaginings, all false starts and false pursuits, all failures of unanimity.
"Why then if he's really so decent, not to say so superior," Haughty went on,
"won't it be the best thing in the world and a great simplification for you to
fall -- that is for you to _be_ -- in love with him? That will be better for
me, you know, than if you're not; for it's the impression evidently made on
you by the late Northover that keeps disturbing my peace of mind. I feel,
though I can't quite tell you why," he explained, "that I'm never going to be
in the least jealous of Gray, and probably not even so much as envious; so
there's your chance -- take advantage of it all the way. Like him at your
ease, my dear, and God send he shall like you! Only be sure it's for himself
you do it -- and for your own self; as you make out your possibilities, _de
part et d'autre_, on your getting nearer to them."
  "So as to be sure, you mean," Cissy inquired, "of not liking him for his
money?"


                             -=-=-  2  -=-=-

He waited a moment, and if she had not immediately after her words sighed
"Oh dear, oh dear!" in quite another, that is a much more serious, key, the
appearance would perhaps have been that [162] for once in a blue moon she had
put into his mind a thought he couldn't have. He couldn't have the thought
that it was of the least importance she should guard herself in the way she
mentioned; and it was in the air, the very next thing, that she couldn't so
idiotically have strayed as to mean to impute it. He quickly enough made the
point that what he preferred was her not founding her interest in Gray so very
abjectly on another man's authority -- given the uncanny fact of the other
man's having cast upon her a charm which time and even his death had done so
little to abate. Yes, the late Northover had clearly had something about him
that it worried a fellow to have her perpetually rake up. _There_ she was
in peril of jealousy -- his jealousy of the queer Northover ghost; unless
indeed it was she herself who was queerest, ridden as her spirit seemed by
sexagenarian charms! He could look after her with Gray -- they were at one
about Gray; what would truly alienate them, should she persist, would be
his own exposure to comparison with the memory of a rococo Briton he had no
arms to combat. Which extravagance of fancy had of course after a minute
sufficiently testified to the clearance of their common air that invariably
sprang from their feeling themselves again together and finding once more
what this came to -- all under sublime palpability of proof. The renewed
consciousness did perhaps nothing for their difficulties as such, [163] but it
did everything for the interest, the amusement, the immediate inspiration of
their facing them: there was in that such an element of their facing each
other and knowing, each time as if they had not known it before, that this
had absolute beauty. It had unmistakably never had more than now, even when
their freedom in it had rapidly led them, under Cissy's wonderment, to a
consideration of whether a happy relation with their friend (he was already
thus her friend too, without her ever having seen him!) mightn't have to count
with some inevitable claim, some natural sentiment, asserted and enjoyed on
Rosanna's part, not to speak of the effect on Graham himself of that young
woman's at once taking such an interest in him and coming in for such a
fortune.
  "In addition to which who shall pretend to deny," the girl earnestly asked,
"that Rosanna has in herself the most extraordinary charm?"
  "Oh you think she has extraordinary charm?"
  "Of course I do -- and so do you: don't be absurd! She's simply superb,"
Cissy expounded, "in her own original way, which no other woman over here
-- except me a little perhaps! -- has so much as a suspicion of anything to
compare with; and which, for all we know, constitutes a luxury entirely at
Graham's service." Cissy required but a single other look at it all to go on:
"I shouldn't in the least wonder if they were already engaged." [164]
  "I don't think there's a chance of it," Haughty said, "and I hold that if
any such fear is your only difficulty you may be quite at your ease. Not only
do I so see it," he went on, "but I know _why_ I do."
  Cissy just waited. "You consider that because she refused Horton Vint she'll
decline marriage altogether?"
  "I think that throws a light," this gentleman smiled -- "though it isn't
_all_ my ground. She turned me down, two years ago, as utterly as I shall ever
have been turned in my life -- and if I chose so to look at it the experience
would do for me beautifully as that of an humiliation served up to a man in
as good form as he need desire. That it was, that it still is when I live it
through again; that it will probably remain, for my comfort -- in the sense
that I'm likely never to have a worse. I've had my dose," he figured, "of that
particular black draught, and I've got the bottle there empty on the shelf."
  "And yet you signify that you're all the same glad---?" Cissy didn't for the
instant wholly follow.
  "Well, it _all_ came to me then; and that it did all come is what I have the
advantage of now -- I mean, you see, in being able to reassure you as I do. I
had some wonderful minutes with her -- it didn't take long," Haughty laughed.
"We _saw_ in those few minutes, being both so horribly [165] intelligent; and
what I recognised has remained with me. What she did is her own affair -- and
that she could so perfectly make it such, without leaving me a glimmer of
doubt, is what I have, as I tell you, to blink at forever. I may ask myself
if you like," he pursued, "why I should 'mind' so much if I saw even at the
moment that she wasn't at any rate going to take someone else -- and if you do
I shall reply that I didn't need that to make it bad. It was bad enough just
in itself. My point is, however," Horton concluded, "that I can give you at
least the benefit of my feeling utterly sure that Gray will have no chance.
She's in the dreadful position -- and more than ever of course now -- of not
being able to believe she can be loved for herself."
  "You mean because _you_ couldn't make her believe it?" asked Cissy after
taking this in.
  "No -- not that, for I didn't so much as try. I didn't -- and it was awfully
superior of me, you know -- approach her at all on that basis. That," said
Horton, "is where it cuts. The basis was that of my own capacity only -- my
capacity to serve her, in every particular, with every aptitude I possess in
the world, and which I could see she _saw_ I possess (it was given me somehow
to send that home to her!) without a hair's breadth overlooked. I shouldn't
have minded her taking me so for impossible, blackly impossible, if she had
done it under an illusion; but she really believed [166] in me as a general
value, quite a first-rate value -- _that_ I stood there and didn't doubt. And
yet she practically said 'You ass!'"
  His encircling arm gained, for response to this, however, but the vibration
of her headshake -- without so much as any shudder at the pain he so vividly
imaged. "She practically said that she was already _then_ in love with
Mr Graham, and you wouldn't have had a better chance had a passion of your
own stuck out of you. If I thought she didn't admire you," Cissy said, "I
shouldn't be able to do with her at all -- it would be too stupid of her;
putting aside her not accepting you, I mean -- for a woman can't accept
_every_ man she admires. I suppose you don't at present object," she
continued, "to her admiring Mr Graham enough to account for anything;
especially as it accounts so for her having just acted on his behalf with such
extraordinary success. Doesn't that make it out for him," she asked, "that
he's admired by twenty millions _plus_ the amount that her reconciliation of
him with his uncle just in time to save it, without an hour to spare, will
represent for his pocket? We don't know what that lucky amount may be---"
  "No, but we more or less _shall_" -- Horton took her straight up. "Of
course, without exaggeration, that will be interesting -- even though it will
be but a question, I'm quite certain, of comparatively small things. Old
Betterman -- there are people [167] who practically know, and I've talked with
them -- isn't going to foot up to any faint likeness of what Gaw does. That,
however, has nothing to do with it: all that _is_ relevant -- since I quite
allow that, speculation for speculation, our association in this sort
represents finer fun than it has yet succeeded in doing in other sorts -- all
that's relevant is that when you've seen Gray you mayn't be in such a hurry
to figure him as a provoker of insatiable passions. Your insidious Northover
has, as you say, worked you up, but wait a little to see if the reality
corresponds."
  "He showed me a photograph, my insidious Northover," Cissy promptly
recalled; "he was _na"if_ enough, poor dear, for that. In fact he made me a
present of several, including one of himself; I owe him as well two or three
other mementos, all of which I've cherished."
  "What was he up to anyway, the old corrupter of your youth?" -- Horton
seemed really to wonder. "Unless it was that you simply reduced him to
infatuated babble."
  "Well, there are the photographs and things to show," she answered
unembarrassed -- "though I haven't them with me here; they're put away in New
York. His portrait's extremely good-looking."
  "Do you mean Mr Northover's own?"
  "Oh _his_ is of course quite beautiful. But I mean Mr Fielder's -- at his
then lovely age. I remember it," said Cissy, "as a nice, nice face." [168]
  Haughty on his side indulged in the act of memory, concluding after an
instant to a headshake. "He isn't at all remarkable for looks; but putting his
nice face at its best, granting that he _has_ a high degree of that advantage,
do you see Rosanna so carried away by it as to cast everything to the winds
for him?"
  Cissy weighed the question. "We've seen surely what she has been carried
away enough to do."
  "She has had other reasons -- independent of headlong passion. And
remember," he further argued -- "if you impute to her a high degree of
that sort of sensibility -- how perfectly proof she was to _my_ physical
attractions, which I declare to you without scruple leave the very brightest
you may discover in Gray completely in the shade."
  Again his companion considered. "Of course you're dazzlingly handsome; but
are you, my dear, after all -- I mean in appearance -- so very _interesting_?"
  The inquiry was so sincere that it could be met but in the same spirit.
"Didn't you then find me so from the first minute you ever looked at me?"
  "We're not talking of me," she returned, "but of people who happen to have
been subjects less predestined and victims less abject. What," she then at
once went on, "_is_ Gray's appearance 'anyway'? Is he black, to begin with, or
white, [169] or betwixt and between? Is he little or big or neither one thing
or t'other? Is he fat or thin or of 'medium weight'? There are always such
lots to be told about people, and never a creature in all the wide world to
tell. Even Mr Northover, when I come to think of it, never mentioned his
size."
  "Well, you _wouldn't_ mention it," Horton amiably argued. The appeal, he
showed withal, stirred him to certain recoveries. "And I should call him black
-- black as to his straight thick hair, which I see rather distinctively
'slick' and soign'e -- the hair of a good little boy who never played at
things that got it tumbled. No, he's only very middling tall; in fact so very
middling," Haughty made out, "that it probably comes to his being rather
short. But he has neither a hump nor a limp, no marked physical deformity of
any sort; has in fact a kind of futile fidgetty quickness which suggests the
little man, and the nervous and the active and the ready; the ready, I mean,
for anything in the way of interest and talk -- given that the matter isn't
too big for him. The 'active', I say, though at the same time," he noted, "I
ask myself what the deuce the activity will have been _about_."
  The girl took in these impressions to the effect of desiring still more of
them. "Doesn't he happen then to have eyes and things?"
  "Oh yes" -- Horton bethought himself -- "lots [170] and lots of eyes, though
not perhaps so many of other things. Good eyes, fine eyes, in fact I think
anything whatever you may require in the way of eyes."
  "Then clearly they're not 'black': I never require black ones," she said,
"in any conceivable connection: his eyes -- blue-grey, or grey-blue, whichever
you may call it, and far and away the most charming kind when one doesn't
happen to be looking into your glorious green ones -- his satisfactory eyes
are what will more than anything else have done the business. They'll have
done it so," she went on, "that if he isn't red in the face, which I defy him
to be, his features don't particularly matter -- though there's not the least
reason either why he should have mean or common ones. In fact he hasn't them
in the photograph, and what are photographs, the wretched things, but the very
truth of life?"
  "He's not red in the face," Haughty was able to state -- "I think of him
rather as of a pale, very pale, clean brown; and entirely unaddicted," he felt
sure, "to flushing or blushing. What I do sort of remember in the feature way
is that his teeth though good, fortunately, as they're shown a good deal, are
rather too small and square; for a man's, that is, so that they make his smile
a trifle---"
  "A trifle irresistible of course," Cissy broke in -- "through their being,
in their charming form, [171] of the happy Latin model; extremely like my
own, be so good as to notice for once in your life, and not like the usual
Anglo-Saxon fangs. You're simply describing, you know," she added, "about as
gorgeous a being as one could wish to see."
  "It's not I who am describing him -- it's you, love; and ever so
delightfully." With which, in consistency with that, he himself put a
question. "What does it come to, by the way, in the sense of a moustache? Does
he, or _doesn't_ he after all, wear one? It's odd I shouldn't remember, but
what does the photograph say?"
  "It seems odd indeed _I_ shouldn't" -- Cissy had a moment's brooding. She
gave herself out as ashamed. "Fancy my not remembering if the photograph is
_moustachue_!"
  "It can't be then _very_," Horton contributed -- the point was really so
interesting.
  "No," Cissy tried to settle, "the photograph can't be so very _moustachue_."
  "His moustaches, I mean, if he wears 'em, can't be so very prodigious; or
one could scarcely have helped noticing, could one?"
  "Certainly no one can ever have failed to notice yours -- and therefore
Gray's, if he has any, must indeed be very inferior. And yet he can't be
shaved like a sneak-thief -- or like all the world here," she developed; "for
I won't have him with nothing at all any more than I'll have him with anything
prodigious, as you say; which is [172] worse than nothing. When I say I won't
have him with nothing," she explained, "I mean I won't have him subject to the
so universally and stupidly applied American law that every man's face without
exception shall be scraped as clean, as _glabre_, as a fish's -- which it
makes so many of them so much resemble. I won't have him so," she said,
"because I won't have him so idiotically gregarious and without that sense of
differences in things, and of their relations and suitabilities, which such
exhibitions make one so ache for. If he's gregarious to that sort of tune we
must renounce our idea -- that is you must drop yours -- of my working myself
up to snatch him from the arms of Rosanna. I must believe in him, for that, I
must see him at least in my own way," she pursued; "believing in myself, or
even believing in you, is a comparative detail. I won't have him bristle with
horrid demagogic notes. I shouldn't be able to act a scrap on that basis."
  It was as if what she said had for him the interest at once of the most
intimate and the most enlarged application; it was in fact as if she alone
in all the world could touch him in such fine ways -- could amuse him, could
verily instruct him, to anything like such a tune. "It seems peculiarly a
question of bristles if it all depends on his moustache. Our suspense as to
that, however, needn't so much ravage us," Haughty added, "when we remember
that Davey, who, you tell me, will by [173] this time have seen him, can
settle the question for us as soon as we meet at dinner. It will by the same
stroke then settle that of the witchcraft which has according to your theory
so bedevilled poor dear Rosanna's sensibility -- leading it such a dance,
I mean, and giving such an empire to certain special items of our friend's
'personality', that the connection was practically immediate with his
brilliant status."


                             -=-=-  3  -=-=-

Horton, looking at his watch, had got up as he spoke -- which Cissy at once
also did under this recall of the lapse of their precious minutes. There was a
point, however, left for her to make; which she did with the remark that the
item they had been discussing in particular couldn't have been by itself the
force that had set their young woman originally in motion, inasmuch as Gray
wouldn't have had a moustache when a small boy or whatever, and as since that
young condition, she understood, Rosanna hadn't again seen him. A proposition
to which Haughty's assent was to remain vague, merged as it suddenly became in
the cry of "Hello, here he is!" and a prompt gay brandish of arms up at their
host Bradham, arrayed for the evening, white-waistcoated and buttonholed,
robustly erect on an overlooking ledge [174] and explaining his presence, from
the moment it was thus observed, by calling down that Gussy had sent him to
see if she wasn't to expect them at dinner. It was practically a summons to
Cissy, as the girl easily recognised, to leave herself at least ten minutes to
dress decently -- in spite of the importance of which she so challenged Davey
on another score that, as a consequence, the good gorgeous man, who shone with
every effect of the bath and every resource of the toilet, had within the pair
of minutes picked out such easiest patent-leather steps as would enable him to
convict the companions of a shameless dawdle. She had had time to articulate
for Horton's benefit, with no more than due distinctness, that he must have
seen them, and Horton had as quickly found the right note and the right
wit for the simple reassurance "Oh Davey---!" As occupants of a place of
procrastination that they only were not such fools as to leave unhaunted they
frankly received their visitor, any impulse in whom to sprinkle stale banter
on their search for solitude would have been forestalled, even had it been
supposable of so perfect a man of the world, by the instant action of his
younger guest's strategic curiosity.
  "Has he, please, just _has_ he or no, got a moustache?" -- she appealed as
if the fate of empires depended on it.
  "I've been telling her," Horton explained, [175] "whatever I can remember of
Gray Fielder, but she won't listen to anything if I can't first be sure as to
_that_. So as I want her enormously to like him, we both hang, you see, on
your lips; unless you call it, more correctly, on his."
  Davey's evening bloom opened to them a dense but perfectly pathless garden
of possibilities; out of which, while he faced them, he left them to pluck by
their own act any bright flower they sufficiently desired to reach. Wonderful
during the few instants, between these flagrant worldlings, the exchange of
fine recognitions. It would have been hard perhaps to say of them whether it
was most discernible that Haughty and Cissy trusted most his intelligence or
his indifference, and whether he most applauded or ignored the high perfection
of their assurance. What was testified to all round, at all events---

                                  * * *

[ There is a gap here in the MS., with the following note by the author:
  'It is the security of the two others with him that is testified to; but
  I mustn't make any sort of spread about it or about anything else here now,
  and only put Davey on some non-committal reply to the question addressed
  him, such as keeps up the mystery or ambiguity or suspense about Gray, his
  moustache and everything else, so as to connect properly with what follows.
  The real point is -- _that_ comes back to me, and it is in essence enough
  -- that he pleads he doesn't remember, didn't notice, at all; and thereby
  oddly enough can't say. It will come to me right once I get into it. One
  sees that Davey plays with them.' ]

                                  * * *

"Ah then he _is_ as 'odd' as I was sure -- in spite of Haughty's perverse
theory that we shall find him the flattest of the flat!" [176]
  It might have been at Haughty's perverse theory that Davey was most moved to
stare -- had he not quickly betrayed, instead of this, a marked attention to
the girl herself. "Oh you little wonder and joy!"
  "She _is_ a little wonder and joy," Horton said -- that at any rate came out
clear.
  "What you are, my boy, I'm not pretending to say," Davey returned in answer
to this; "for I don't accept her account of your vision of Gray as throwing
any light on it at all."
  "On his judgment of Mr Fielder, do you mean," Cissy earnestly asked, "or on
your evidently awful opinion of his own dark nature?"
  "Haughty knows that I lose myself in his dark nature, at my spare moments,
and with wind enough on to whistle in that dark, very much as if I had the
fine excitement of the For^et de Bondy to deal with. He's well aware that I
know no greater pleasure of the imagination than that sort of interest in him
-- when I happen also to have the time and the nerve. Let these things serve
me now, however, only to hurry you up," Davey went on; "and to say that I of
course had with our fortunate friend an impressive quarter of an hour -- which
everyone will want to know about, so that I must keep it till we sit down. But
the great thing is after all for yourself, Haughty," he added -- "and you had
better know at once that he particularly wants to see you. He'll be glad of
you at the very first moment---" [177]
  But Horton had already taken him easily up. "Of course I know, my dear man,
that he particularly wants to see me. He has written me nothing else from the
moment he arrived."
  "He has written you, you wretch," Cissy at once extravagantly echoed -- "he
has written you all sorts of things and you haven't so much as told me?"
  "He hasn't written me all sorts of things" -- Horton directed this answer to
Davey alone -- "but has written me in such straight confidence and friendship
that I've been wondering if I mayn't go round to him this evening."
  "Gussy will no doubt excuse you for that purpose with the utmost joy," Davey
rejoined -- "though I don't think I advise you to ask her leave if you don't
want her at once to insist on going with you. Go to him alone, very quietly --
and with the happy confidence of doing him good."
  It had been on Cissy that, for his part, Davey had, in speaking, rested his
eyes; and it might by the same token have been for the benefit of universal
nature, suspended to listen over the bosom of the deep, that Horton's lips
phrased his frank reaction upon their entertainer's words. "Well then, ye
powers, the amount of good that I shall undertake---!"
  Davey Bradham and Cissy Foy exchanged on the whole ground for a moment a
considerable [178] smile; his share in which, however, it might exactly have
been that prompted the young woman's further expression of their intelligence.
"It's too charming that he yearns so for Haughty -- and too sweet that Haughty
can now rush to him at once." To which she then appended in another tone: "One
takes for granted of course that Rosanna was with him."
  Davey at this but continued to bloom and beam; which gave Horton, even with
a moment's delay, time to assist his better understanding. "She doesn't even
yet embrace the fact, tremendously as I've driven it into her, that if Rosanna
had been there he couldn't have breathed my name."
  This made Davey, however, but throw up derisive hands; though as with
an impatient turn now for their regaining the lawn. "My dear man, Rosanna
breathes your name with all the force of her lungs!"
  Horton, jerking back his head for the bright reassurance, laughed out with
amusement. "What a jolly cue then for my breathing of hers! I'll roar it to
all the echoes, and everything will be well. But what one's talking about,"
he said, "is the question of Gray's naming _me_." He looked from one of his
friends to the other, and then, as gathering them into the interest of it:
"I'll bet you a fiver that he doesn't at any rate speak to me of Miss Gaw."
  "Well, what will that prove?" Davey asked, [179] quite easy about it and
leading the way up the rocks.
  "In the first place how much he thinks of her," said Cissy, who followed
close behind. "And in the second that it's ten to one Haughty will find her
there."
  "I don't care if I do -- not a scrap!" Horton also took his way. "I don't
care for anything now but the jolly fun, the jolly fun---!" He had committed
it all again, by the time they reached the cliff's edge, to the bland
participating elements.
  "Oh the treat the poor boy is evidently going to stand us _all_!" -- well,
was something that Davey, rather out of breath as they reached the lawn again
and came in sight of the villa, had just yet no more than those light words
for. He was more definite in remarking immediately after to Cissy that Rosanna
would be as little at the other house that evening as she had been at the
moment of his own visit, and that, since the nurses and other outsiders
appeared to have dispersed, there would be no one to interfere with Gray's
free welcome of his friend. The girl was so attentive for this that it made
them pause again while she brought out in surprise: "There's nobody else
there, you mean then, to watch with the dead---?"
  It made Mr Bradham for an instant wonder, Horton, a little apart from them
now and with [180] his back turned, seeming at the same moment, and whether or
no her inquiry reached his ear, struck with something that had pulled him up
as well and that made him stand and look down in thought. "Why, I suppose the
nephew must be himself a sort of watcher," Davey found himself not other than
decently vague to suggest.
  But it scarce more contented Cissy than if the point had really concerned
her. She appeared indeed to question the more, though her eyes were on
Haughty's rather brooding back while she did so. "Then if he does stay in the
room, when he comes out of it to see people---?"
  Her very drop seemed to present the state of things to which the poor
deceased was in that case left; for which, however, her good host declined to
be responsible. "I don't suppose he comes out for so many."
  "He came out at any rate for you." The sense of it all rather remarkably
held her, and it might have been some communication of this that, overtaking
Horton at his slight distance, determined in him the impulse to leave them,
without more words, and walk by himself to the house. "We don't surround such
occasions with any form or state of imagination -- scarcely with any decency,
do we?" Cissy adventured while observing Haughty's retreat. "I should like to
think for him of a catafalque and great draped hangings -- I should like to
think for him of tall flambeaux [181] in the darkened room, and of relays of
watchers, sisters of charity or suchlike, surrounding the grand affair and
counting their beads."
  Davey's rich patience had a shrug. "The grand affair, my dear child, is
_their_ affair, over there, and not mine; though when you indulge in such
fancies 'for him', I can't but wonder who it is you mean."
  "Who it is---?" She mightn't have understood his difficulty.
  "Why the dead man or the living!"
  They had gone on again; Horton had, with a quickened pace, disappeared; and
she had before answering cast about over the fair face of the great house,
paler now in the ebb of day, yet with dressing-time glimmers from upper
windows flushing it here and there like touches of pink paint in an elegant
evening complexion. "Oh I care for the dead man, I'm afraid, only because it's
the living who appeals. I don't want _him_ to like it."
  "To like---?" Davey was again at a loss. "What on earth?"
  "Why all that ugliness and bareness, that poverty of form."
  He had nothing but derision for her here. "It didn't occur to me at all to
associate him with the idea of poverty."
  "The place must all the same be hideous," she said, "and the conditions mean
-- for him to prowl [182] about in alone. It comes to me," she further risked,
"that if Rosanna _isn't_ there, as you say, she quite ought to be -- and that
in her place I should feel it no more than decent to go over and sit with
him."
  This appeared to strike Davey in a splendid number of lights -- which,
however, though collectively dazzling, allowed discriminations. "It perhaps
bears a little on the point that she has herself just sustained a grave
bereavement -- with her offices to her own dead to think of first. That was
present to me in your talk a moment since of Haughty's finding her."
  "Very true" -- it was Cissy's practice, once struck, ever amusedly to play
with the missile: "it _is_ of course extraordinary that those bloated old
_richards_, at one time so associated, should have flickered out almost at the
same hour. What it comes to then," she went on, "is that Mr Gray might be, or
perhaps even ought to be, condoling over at the other house with her. However,
it's their own business, and all I really care for is that he should be so
keen as you say about seeing Haughty. I just delight," she said, "in his being
keen about Haughty."
  "I'm glad it satisfies you then," Davey returned -- "for I was on the point
of suggesting that with the sense of his desolation you just expressed you
might judge your own place to be at once at his side." [183]
  "That would have been helpful of you -- but I'm content, dear Davey," she
smiled. "We're all devoted to Haughty -- but," she added after an instant,
"there's just this. Did Mr Graham while you were there say by chance a word
about the likes of _me_?"
  "Well, really, no -- our short talk didn't take your direction. That would
have been for me, I confess," Davey frankly made bold to add, "a trifle
unexpected."
  "I see" -- Cissy did him the justice. "But that's a little, I think, because
you don't know---!" It was more, however, than with her sigh she could tell
him.
  "Don't know by this time, my dear, and after all I've been through," he
nevertheless supplied, "what the American girl always so sublimely takes for
granted?"
  She looked at him on this with intensity -- but that of compassion rather
than of the conscious wound. "Dear old Davey, _il n'y a que vous_ for not
knowing, by this time, as you say, that I've notoriously nothing in common
with the creature you mention. I loathe," she said with her purest gentleness,
"the American girl."
  He faced her an instant more as for a view of the whole incongruity; then he
fetched, on his side, a sigh which might have signified, at her choice, either
that he was wrong or that he was finally bored. "Well, you do of course
brilliantly [184] misrepresent her. But we're all" -- he hastened to patch it
up -- "unspeakably corrupt."
  "That would be a fine lookout for Mr Fielder if it were true," she
judiciously threw off.
  "But as you're a judge you know it isn't?"
  "It's not as a judge I know it, but as a victim. I don't say we don't do our
best," she added; "but we're still of an innocence, an innocence---!"
  "Then perhaps," Davey offered, "Mr Fielder will help us; unless he proves,
by your measure, worse than ourselves!"
  "The worse he may be the better; for it's not possible, as I see him," she
said, "that he doesn't know."
  "Know, you mean," Davey blandly wondered, "how wrong we are -- to be so
right?"
  "Know more on _every_ subject than all of us put together!" she called back
at him as she now hurried off to dress.


                             -=-=-  4  -=-=-

Horton Vint, on being admitted that evening at the late Mr Betterman's, walked
about the room to which he had been directed and awaited there the friend of
his younger time very much as we have seen that friend himself wait under
stress of an extraordinary crisis. Horton's sense of a crisis might have been
almost equally sharp; [185] he was alone for some minutes during which he
shifted his place and circled, indulged in wide vague movements and vacuous
stares at incongruous objects -- the place being at once so spacious and so
thickly provided -- quite after the fashion in which Gray Fielder's nerves and
imagination had on the same general scene sought and found relief at the hour
of the finest suspense up to that moment possessing him. Haughty too, it would
thus have appeared for the furtherance of our interest, had imagination and
nerves -- had in his way as much to reflect upon as we have allowed ourselves
to impute to the dying Mr Betterman's nephew. No one was dying now, all that
was ended, or would be after the funeral, and the nephew himself was surely to
be supposed alive, in face of great sequels, including preparations for those
obsequies, with an intensity beyond all former experience. This in fact Horton
had all the air of recognising under proof as soon as Gray advanced upon him
with both hands out; he couldn't not have taken in the highly quickened state
of the young black-clad figure so presented, even though soon and unmistakably
invited to note that his own visit and his own presence had much to do with
the quickening. Gray was in complete mourning, which had the effect of making
his face show pale, as compared with old aspects of it remembered by his
friend -- who was, it may be mentioned, afterwards to describe him to [186]
Cissy Foy as looking, in the conditions, these including the air of the big
bedimmed palace room, for all the world like a sort of 'happy Hamlet'. For so
happy indeed our young man at once proclaimed himself at sight of his visitor,
for so much the most interesting thing that had befallen or been offered him
within the week did he take, by his immediate testimony, his reunion with this
character and every element of the latter's aspect and tone, that the pitch
of his acclamation clearly _had_, with no small delay, to drop a little under
some unavoidable reminder that they met almost in the nearest presence of
death. Was the reminder Horton's own, some pull, for decorum, of a longer
face, some expression of his having feared to act in undue haste on the
message brought him by Davey? -- which might have been, we may say, in view of
the appearance after a little that it was Horton rather than Gray who began
to suggest a shyness, momentary, without doubt, and determined by the very
plenitude of his friend's welcome, yet so far incongruous as that it was
not _his_ adoption of a manner and betrayal of a cheer that ran the risk
of seeming a trifle gross, but quite these indications on the part of the
fortunate heir of the old person awaiting interment somewhere above. He could
only have seen with the lapse of the moments that Gray was going to be simple
-- admirably, splendidly simple, one would probably have pronounced [187]
it, in estimating and comparing the various possible dangers; but the
simplicity of subjects tremendously educated, tremendously 'cultivated' and
cosmopolitised, as Horton would have called it, especially when such persons
were naturally rather extra-refined and ultra-perceptive, was a different
affair from the crude candour of the common sort; the consequence of which
apprehensions and reflections must have been, in fine, that he presently
recognised in the product of 'exceptional advantages' now already more
and more revealed to him such a pliability of accent as would easily keep
judgment, or at least observation, suspended. Gray wasn't going to be at a
loss for any shade of decency that didn't depend, to its inconvenience, on
some uncertainty about a guest's prejudice; so that once the air was cleared
of awkwardness by that perception, exactly, in Horton's ready mind that he and
his traditions, his susceptibilities, in fact (of all the queer things!) his
own very simplicities and, practically, stupidities were being superfluously
allowed for and deferred to, and that this, only this, was the matter, he
should have been able to surrender without a reserve to the proposed measure
of their common rejoicing. Beautiful might it have been to him to find his
friend so considerately glad of him that the spirit of it could consort to
the last point with any, with every, other felt weight in the consciousness
so [188] attested; in accordance with which we may remark that continued
embarrassment for our gallant caller would have implied on his own side, or in
other words deep within his own spirit, some obscure source of confusion.
  What distinguishably happened was thus that he first took Graham for
exuberant and then for repentant, with the reflection accompanying this that
he mustn't, to increase of subsequent shame, have been too open an accomplice
in mere jubilation. Then the simple sense of his restored comrade's holding
at his disposal a general confidence in which they might absolutely breathe
together would have superseded everything else hadn't his individual
self-consciousness been perhaps a trifle worried by the very pitch of so much
openness. Open, not less generously so, was what he could himself have but
wanted to be -- in proof of which we may conceive him insist to the happy
utmost, for promotion of his comfort, on those sides of their relation the
working of which would cast no shadow. They had within five minutes got over
much ground -- all of which, however, must be said to have represented,
and only in part, the extent of Gray's requisition of what he called just
elementary human help. He was in a situation at which, as he assured his
friend, he had found himself able, those several days, but blankly and inanely
to stare. He didn't suppose it had been his uncle's definite design to make an
idiot of him, but that [189] seemed to threaten as the practical effect of the
dear man's extraordinary course. "You see," he explained, bringing it almost
pitifully out, "he appears to have left me a most monstrous fortune. I mean"
-- for under his appeal Haughty had still waited a little -- "a really
tremendous lot of money."
  The effect of the tone of it was to determine in Haughty a peal of laughter
quickly repressed -- or reduced at least to the intention of decent cheer. "He
'appears', my dear man? Do you mean there's an ambiguity about his will?"
  Gray justified his claim of vagueness by having, with his animated eyes on
his visitor's, to take an instant or two to grasp so technical an expression.
"No -- not an ambiguity. Mr Crick tells me that he has never in all his
experience seen such an amount of property disposed of in terms so few and
simple and clear. It would seem a kind of masterpiece of a will."
  "Then what's the matter with it?" Horton smiled. "Or at least what's the
matter with _you_? -- who are so remarkably intelligent and clever?"
  "Oh no, I'm not the least little bit clever!" Gray in his earnestness quite
excitedly protested. "I haven't a single ray of the intelligence that among
you all here clearly passes for rudimentary. But the luxury of _you_,
Haughty," he broke out on a still higher note, "the luxury, the pure luxury of
you!" [190]
  Something of beauty in the very tone of which, some confounding force in the
very clearness, might it have been that made Horton himself gape for a moment
even as Gray had just described his own wit as gaping. They had first sat
down, for hospitality offered and accepted -- though with no production of the
smokable or the drinkable to profane the general reference; but the agitation
of all that was latent in this itself had presently broken through, and by the
end of a few moments we might perhaps scarce have been able to say whether the
host had more set the guest or the guest more the host in motion. Horton Vint
had everywhere so the air of a prime social element that it took in any case,
and above all in any case of the spacious provision or the sumptuous setting,
a good deal of practically combative proof to reduce the implications of his
presence to the minor right. He _might_ inveterately have been master or, in
quantitative terms, owner -- so could he have been taken for the most part
as offering you the enjoyment of anything fine that surrounded him: this in
proportion to the scale of such matters and to any glimpse of that sense of
them in you which was what came nearest to putting you on his level. All
of which sprang doubtless but from the fact that his relation to things of
expensive interest was so much at the mercy of his appearance; representing
as it might be said to do a contradiction of the law under [191] which it is
mostly to be observed, in our modernest conditions, that the figure least
congruous with scenic splendour is the figure awaiting the reference. More
references than may here be detailed, at any rate, would Horton have seemed
ready to gather up during the turns he had resumed his indulgence in after the
original arrest and the measurements of the whole place practically determined
for him by Gray's own so suggestive revolutions. It was positively now as if
these last had all met, in their imperfect expression, what that young man's
emotion was in the act of more sharply attaining to -- the plain conveyance
that if Horton had in his friendliness, not to say his fidelity, presumed to
care to know, this disposition was as naught beside the knowledge apparently
about to drench him. They were there, the companions, in their second brief
arrest, with everything good in the world that he might have conceived or
coveted just taking for him the radiant form of precious knowledges that
he must be so obliging as to submit to. Let it be fairly inspiring to us
to imagine the acuteness of his perception during these minutes of the
possibilities of good involved; the refinement of pleasure in his seeing
how the advantage thrust upon him would wear the dignity and grace of his
consenting unselfishly to learn -- inasmuch as, quite evidently, the more
he learnt, and though it should be ostensibly and exclusively about
Mr Betterman's heir, [192] the more vividly it all would stare at him as a
marked course of his own. Wonderful thus the little space of his feeling the
great wave set in motion by that quiet worthy break upon him out of Gray's
face, Gray's voice, Gray's contact of hands laid all appealingly and
affirmingly on his shoulders, and then as it retreated, washing him warmly
down, expose to him, off in the intenser light and the uncovered prospect,
something like his entire personal future. Something extraordinarily
like, yes, could he but keep steady to recognise it through a deepening
consciousness, at the same time, of how he was more than matching the growth
of his friend's need of him by growing there at once, and to rankness, under
the friend's nose, all the values to which this need supplied a soil.
  "Well, I won't pretend I'm not glad you don't adopt me as pure ornament --
glad you see, I mean, a few connections in which one may perhaps be able, as
well as certainly desirous, to be of service to you. Only one should honestly
tell you," Horton went on, "that people wanting to help you will spring up
round you like mushrooms, and that you'll be able to pick and choose as even a
king on his throne can't. Therefore, my boy," Haughty said, "don't exaggerate
my modest worth."
  Gray, though releasing him, still looked at him hard -- so hard perhaps
that, having imagination, [193] he might in an instant more have felt it go
down too deep. It hadn't done that, however, when "What I want of you above
all is exactly that _you_ shall pick and choose" was merely what at first came
of it. And the case was still all of the rightest as Graham at once added:
"You see 'people' are exactly my difficulty -- I'm so mortally afraid of them,
and so equally sure that it's the last thing you are. If I want you for myself
I want you still more for others -- by which you may judge," said Gray, "that
I've cut you out work."
  "That you're mortally afraid of people is, I confess," Haughty answered,
"news to me. I seem to remember you, on the contrary, as so remarkably and --
what was it we used to call it? -- so critico-analytically interested in 'em."
  "That's just it -- I _am_ so beastly interested! Don't you therefore see,"
Gray asked, "how I may dread the complication?"
  "Dread it so that you seek to work it off on another?" -- and Haughty looked
about as if he would after all have rather relished a cigarette.
  Clearly, none the less, this awkwardness was lost on his friend. "I want to
work off on you, Vinty, every blest thing that you'll let me; and when you've
seen into my case a little further my reasons will so jump at your eyes that
I'm convinced you'll have patience with them."
  "I'm not then, you think, too beastly interested myself---? I've got such a
free mind, [194] you mean, and such a hard heart, and such a record of failure
to have been any use at all to myself, that I _must_ be just the person, it
strikes you, to save you all the trouble and secure you all the enjoyment?"
That inquiry Horton presently made, but with an addition ere Gray could
answer. "My difficulty for myself, you see, has always been that I also am by
my nature too beastly interested."
  "Yes" -- Gray promptly met it -- "but you like it, take that easily,
immensely enjoy it and are not a bit afraid of it. You carry it off and you
don't pay for it."
  "Don't you make anything," Horton simply went on, "of my being for instance
so uncannily interested in yourself?"
  Gray's eyes again sounded him. "_Are_ you really and truly? -- to the extent
of its not boring you?" But with all he had even at the worst to take for
granted he waited for no reassurance. "You'll be so sorry for me that I shall
wring your heart and you'll assist me for common pity."
  "Well," Horton returned, a natural gaiety of response not wholly kept under,
"how can I absurdly make believe that pitying you, if it comes to that,
won't be enough against nature to have some fascination? Endowed with every
advantage, personal, physical, material, moral, in other words, brilliantly
clever, inordinately rich, strikingly handsome and incredibly good, [195] your
state yet insists on being such as to nip in the bud the hardy flower of envy.
What's the matter with you to bring that about would seem, I quite agree, well
worth one's looking into -- even if it proves, by its perversity or its folly,
something of a trial to one's practical philosophy. When I pressed you some
minutes ago for the reason of your not facing the future with a certain
ease you gave as that reason your want of education and wit. But please
understand," Horton added, "that I've no time to waste with you on sophistry
that isn't so much as plausible." He stopped a moment, his hands in his
pockets, his head thrown all but extravagantly back, so that his considering
look might have seemed for the time to descend from a height designed a little
to emphasise Gray's comparative want of stature. That young man's own eyes
remained the while, none the less, unresentfully raised; to such an effect
indeed that, after some duration of this exchange, the bigger man's fine irony
quite visibly shaded into a still finer, and withal frankly kinder, curiosity.
Poor Gray, with a strained face and an agitation but half controlled, breathed
quick and hard, as from inward pressure, and then, renouncing choice -- there
were so many things to say -- shook his head, slowly and repeatedly, after a
fashion that discouraged levity. "My dear boy," said his friend under this
sharper impression, "you do take it hard." Which made Graham turn away, [196]
move about in vagueness of impatience and, still panting and still hesitating
for other expression, approach again, as from a blind impulse, the big
chimney-piece, reach for a box that raised a presumption of cigarettes and,
the next instant, thrust it out in silence at his visitor. The latter's
welcome of the motion, his prompt appropriation of relief, was also mute; with
which he found matches in advance of Gray's own notice of them and had a light
ready, of which our young man himself partook, before the box went back to
its shelf. Odd again might have been for a protected witness of this scene --
which of course is exactly what you are invited to be -- the lapse of speech
that marked it for the several minutes. Horton, truly touched now, and to the
finer issue we have glanced at, waited unmistakably for the sign of something
more important than his imagination, even at its best, could give him, and
which, not less conceivably, would be the sort of thing he himself hadn't
signs, either actual or possible, for. He waited while they did the place
at last the inevitable small violence -- this being long enough to make him
finally say: "Do you mean, on your honour, that you don't _like_ what has
happened to you?"
  This unloosed then for Gray the gate of possible expression. "Of course I
like it -- that is of course I try to. I've been trying here, day after day,
as hard as ever a decent man can have tried for [197] anything; and yet I
remain, don't you see? a wretched little worm."
  "Deary, deary me," stared Horton, "that you should have to bring up your
appreciation of it from such depths! You go in for it as you would for the
electric light or the telephone, and then find half-way that you can't stand
the expense and want the next-door man somehow to combine with you?"
  "That's exactly it, Vinty, and you're the next-door man!" -- Gray embraced
the analogy with glee. "I _can't_ stand the expense, and yet I don't for
a moment deny I should immensely enjoy the convenience. I _want_," he
asseverated, "to like my luck. I want to go in for it, as you say, with every
inch of any such capacity as I have. And I want to believe in my capacity;
I want to work it up and develop it -- I assure you on my honour I do. I've
lashed myself up into feeling that if I don't I shall be a base creature, a
worm of worms, as I say, and fit only to be utterly ashamed. But that's where
you come in. You'll help me to develop. To develop my capacity I mean," he
explained with a wondrous candour.
  Horton was now, small marvel, all clear faith; even, the cigarettes helping,
to the verge again of hilarity. "Your capacity -- I see. Not so much your
property itself."
  "Well" -- Gray considered of it -- "what will my property be _except_ my
capacity?" He spoke [198] really as for the pleasure of seeing very finely and
very far. "It won't if I don't like it, that is if I don't _understand_ it,
don't you see? enough to _make_ it count. Yes, yes, don't revile me," he
almost feverishly insisted: "I do want it to count for all it's worth, and
to get everything out of it, to the very last drop of interest, pleasure,
experience, whatever you may call it, that such a possession can yield. And
I'm going to keep myself up to it, to the top of the pitch, by every art and
prop, by every helpful dodge, that I can put my hand on. You see if I don't.
I breathe defiance," he continued, with his rare radiance, "at any suspicion
or doubt. But I come back," he had to add, "to my point that it's you that I
essentially most depend on."
  Horton again looked at him long and frankly; this subject of appeal
might indeed for the moment have been as embarrassed between the various
requisitions of response as Gray had just before shown himself. But as the
tide could surge for one of the pair so it could surge for the other, and the
large truth of what Horton most grasped appeared as soon as he had spoken.
"The name of your complaint, you poor dear delightful person, or the name at
least of your necessity, your predicament and your solution, is marriage to
a wife at short order. I mean of course to an amiable one. _There_, so
obviously, is your aid and your prop, there are the sources of success for
interest in [199] your fortune, and for the whole experience and enjoyment of
it, as you can't find them elsewhere. What are you but just 'fixed' to marry,
and what is the sense of your remarks but a more or less intelligent clamour
for it?"
  Triumphant indeed, as we have said, for lucidity and ease, was this
question, and yet it had filled the air, for its moment, but to drop at once
by the practical puncture of Gray's perfect recognition. "Oh of course I've
thought of that -- but it doesn't meet my case at all." Had he been capable of
disappointment in his friend he might almost have been showing it now.
  Horton had, however, no heat about it. "You mean you absolutely don't _want_
a wife -- in connection, so to speak, with your difficulties; or with the
idea, that is, of their being resolved into blessings?"
  "Well" -- Gray was here at least all prompt and clear -- "I keep down, in
that matter, so much as I can any _a priori_ or mere theoretic want. I see my
possibly marrying as an effect, I mean -- I somehow don't see it at all as a
cause. A cause, that is" -- he easily worked it out -- "of my getting other
things right. It may be, in conditions, the greatest rightness of all; but I
want to be sure of the conditions."
  "The first of which is, I understand then" -- for this at least had been too
logical for Haughty not to have to match it -- "that you should fall so [200]
tremendously in love that you won't be able to help yourself."
  Graham just debated; he was all intelligence here. "Falling tremendously in
love -- the way you _grands amoureux_ talk of such things!"
  "Where do you find, my boy," Horton asked, "that I'm a _grand amoureux_?"
  Well, Gray had but to consult his memory of their young days together;
there was the admission, under pressure, that he might have confused the
appearances. "They were at any rate always up and at you -- which seems to
have left me with the impression that your life is full of them."
  "Every man's life is full of them that has a door or a window they can come
in by. But the question's of yourself," said Haughty, "and just exactly of the
number of such that you'll have to keep open or shut in the immense fa,cade
you'll now present."
  Our young man might well have struck him as before all else inconsequent. "I
shall present an immense fa,cade?" -- Gray, from his tone of surprise, to call
it nothing more, would have thought of this for the first time.
  But Horton just hesitated. "You've great ideas if you see it yourself as a
small one."
  "I don't see it as _any_. I decline," Gray remarked, "to _have_ a fa,cade.
And if I don't I shan't have the windows and doors." [201]
  "You've got 'em already, fifty in a row" -- Haughty was remorseless -- "and
it isn't a question of 'having': you _are_ a fa,cade; stretching a mile right
and left. How can you not be when I'm walking up and down in front of you?"
  "Oh you walk up and down, you _make_ the things you pass, and you can behave
of course if you want like one of the giants in uniform, outside the big
shops, who attend the ladies in and out. In fact," Gray went on, "I don't in
the least judge that I _am_, or can be at all advertised as, one of the really
big. You seem all here so hideously rich that I needn't fear to count as
extraordinary; indeed I'm very competently assured I'm by all your standards
a very moderate affair. And even if I were a much greater one" -- he gathered
force -- "my appearance of it would depend only on myself. You can have means
and not be blatant; you can take up, by the very fact itself, if you happen to
be decent, no more room than may suit your taste. I'll be hanged if I consent
to take up an inch more than suits mine. Even though not of the truly bloated
I've at least means to be quiet. Every one among us -- I mean among the
moneyed -- isn't a monster on exhibition." In proof of which he abounded. "I
know people myself who aren't."
  Horton considered him with amusement, as well apparently as the people that
he knew! "Of course you may dig the biggest hole in the ground [202] that ever
was dug -- spade-work comes high, but you'll have the means -- and get down
into it and sit at the very bottom. Only your hole will become then _the_
feature of the scene, and we shall crowd a thousand deep all round the edge of
it."
  Gray stood for a moment looking down, then faced his guest as with a slight
effort. "Do you know about Rosanna Gaw?" And then while Horton, for reasons of
his own, failed at once to answer: "_She_ has come in for millions---"
  "Twenty-two and a fraction," Haughty said at once. "Do you mean that she
sits, like Truth, at the bottom of a well?" he asked still more divertedly.
  Gray had a sharp gesture. "If there's a person in the world whom I don't
call a fa,cade---!"
  "You don't call _her_ one?" -- Haughty took it right up. And he added as for
very compassion: "My poor man, my poor man---!"
  "She loathes self-exhibition; she loathes being noticed; she loathes every
form of publicity." Gray quite flushed for it.
  Horton went to the mantel for another cigarette, and there was that in the
calm way of it that made his friend, even though helping him this time to
a light, wait in silence for his word. "She does more than that" -- it was
brought quite dryly out. "She loathes every separate dollar she possesses."
  Gray's sense of the matter, strenuous though [203] it was, could just stare
at this extravagance of assent; seeing however, on second thoughts, what there
might be in it. "Well then if what I have is a molehill beside her mountain, I
can the more easily emulate her in standing back."
  "What you have is a molehill?" Horton was concerned to inquire.
  Gray showed a shade of guilt, but faced his judge. "Well -- so I gather."
  The judge at this lost patience. "Am I to understand that you positively
_cultivate_ vagueness and water it with your tears?"
  "Yes" -- the culprit was at least honest -- "I should rather say I do. And I
want you to let me. Do let me."
  "It's apparently more then than Miss Gaw does!"
  "Yes" -- Gray again considered; "she seems to know more or less what she's
worth, and she tells me that I can't even begin to approach it."
  "Very crushing of her!" his friend laughed. "You 'make the pair', as they
say, and you must help each other much. Her 'loathing' it exactly is -- since
we know all about it! -- that gives her a frontage as wide as the Capitol at
Washington. Therefore your comparison proves little -- though I confess it
would rather help us," Horton pursued, "if you could seem, as you say, to have
asked one or two of the questions that I should suppose would have been open
to you." [204]
  "Asked them of Mr Crick, you mean?"
  "Well, yes -- if you've nobody else, and as you appear not to have been able
to have cared to look at the will yourself."
  Something like a light of hope, at this, kindled in Gray's face. "Would
_you_ care to look at it, Vinty?"
  The inquiry gave Horton pause. "Look at it now, you mean?"
  "Well -- whenever you like. I think," said Gray, "it must be in the house."
  "You're not sure even of _that_?" his companion wailed.
  "Oh I know there are two" -- our young man had coloured. "I don't mean
different ones, but copies of the same," he explained; "one of which Mr Crick
must have."
  "And the other of which" -- Horton pieced it together -- "is the one you
offer to show me?"
  "Unless, unless---!" and Gray, casting about, bethought himself. "Unless
_that_ one---!" With his eyes on his friend's he still shamelessly wondered.
  "Unless that one has happened to get lost," Horton tenderly suggested, "so
that you can't after all produce it?"
  "No, but it may be upstairs, upstairs---" Gray continued to turn this over.
"I think it _is_," he then recognised, "where I had perhaps better not just
now disturb it." [205]
  His recognition was nothing, apparently, however, to the clear quickness of
Horton's. "It's in your uncle's own room?"
  "The room," Gray assented, "where he lies in death while we talk here."
This, his tone suggested, sufficiently enjoined delay.
  Horton's concurrence was immediately such that, once more turning off, he
measured, for the intensity of it, half the room. "I can't advise you without
the facts that you're unable to give," he said as he came back, "but I don't
indeed invite you to go and rummage in that presence." He might have exhaled
the faintest irony, save that verily by this time, between these friends -- by
which I mean of course as from one of them only, the more generally assured,
to the other -- irony would, to an at all exhaustive analysis, have been felt
to flicker in their medium. Gray might in fact, on the evidence of his next
words, have found it just distinguishable.


                             -=-=-  5  -=-=-

"We do talk here while he lies in death" -- they had in fine all serenity for
it. "But the extraordinary thing is that my putting myself this way at my ease
-- and for that matter putting you at yours -- is exactly what the dear man
made to me the greatest point of. I haven't the shade [206] of a sense, and
don't think I ever shall have, of not doing what he wanted of me; for what
he wanted of me," our particular friend continued, "is -- well, so utterly
unconventional. He would _like_ my being the right sort of well-meaning idiot
that you catch me in the very fact of. I warned him, I sincerely, passionately
warned him, that I'm not fit, in the smallest degree, for the use, for the
care, for even the most rudimentary comprehension, of a fortune; and that
exactly it was which seemed most to settle him. He wanted me clear, to the
last degree, not only of the financial brain, but of any sort of faint germ of
the money-sense whatever -- down to the very lack of power, if he might be so
happy (or if _I_ might!) to count up to ten on my fingers. Satisfied of the
limits of my arithmetic he passed away in bliss."
  To this, as fairly lucid, Horton had applied his understanding. "You can't
count up to ten?"
  "Not all the way. Still," our young man smiled, "the greater inspiration may
now give me the lift."
  His guest looked as if one might by that time almost have doubted. But it
was indeed an extraordinary matter. "How comes it then that your want of
arithmetic hasn't given you a want of order? -- unless indeed I'm mistaken and
you _were_ perhaps at sixes and sevens?"
  "Well, I think I was at sixes -- though I never [207] got up to sevens! I've
never had the least rule or method; but that has been a sort of thing I could
more or less cover up -- from others, I mean, not from myself, who have always
been helplessly ashamed of it. It hasn't been the disorder of extravagance,"
Gray explained, "but the much more ignoble kind, the wasteful thrift that
doesn't really save, that simply misses, and that neither enjoys things
themselves nor enjoys their horrid little equivalent of hoarded pence. I
haven't needed to count far, the fingers of one hand serving for my four or
five possessions; and also I've kept straight not by taking no liberties with
my means, but by taking none with my understanding of them. From fear of
counting wrong, and from loathing of the act of numerical calculation, and of
the humiliation of having to give it up after so few steps from the start,
I've never counted at all -- and that, you see, is what has saved me. That has
been _my_ sort of disorder -- which you'll agree is the most pitiful of all."
  Horton once more turned away from him, but slowly this time, not in
impatience, rather with something of the preoccupation of a cup-bearer whose
bowl has been filled to the brim and who must carry it a distance with a
steady hand. So for a minute or two might he have been taking this care; at
the end of which, however, Gray saw him stop in apparent admiration before a
tall inlaid and brass-bound French _bahut_; with [208] the effect, after a
further moment, of a sharp break of their thread of talk. "You've got some
things here at least to enjoy and that you ought to know how to keep hold of;
though I don't so much mean," he explained, "this expensive piece of furniture
as the object of interest perched on top."
  "Oh the ivory tower! -- yes, isn't that, Vinty, a prize piece and worthy of
the lovely name?"
  Vinty remained for the time all admiration, having, as you would easily have
seen, lights enough to judge by. "It appears to have been your uncle's only
treasure -- as everything else about you here is of a newness! And it isn't so
much too small, Gray," he laughed, "for you to get into it yourself, when you
want to get rid of us, and draw the doors to. If it's a symbol of any retreat
you really have an eye on I much congratulate you; I don't know what I
wouldn't give myself for the 'run' of an ivory tower."
  "Well, I can't ask you to share mine," Gray returned; "for the situation
to have a sense, I take it, one must sit in one's tower alone. And I should
properly say," he added after an hesitation, "that mine is the one object,
all round me here, that I don't owe my uncle: it has been placed at my
disposition, in the handsomest way in the world, by Rosanna Gaw."
  "Ah that does increase the interest -- even if susceptible of seeming to
mean, to one's bewilderment, that it's the sort of thing she would like [209]
to thrust you away into; which I hope, however, is far from the case. Does she
then _keep_ ivory towers, a choice assortment?" Horton quite gaily continued;
"in the sense of having a row of them ready for occupation, and with tenants
to match perchable in each and signalling along the line from summit to
summit? Because" -- and, facing about from his contemplation, he piled up his
image even as the type of object represented by it might have risen in the
air -- "you give me exactly, you see, the formula of that young lady herself:
perched aloft in an ivory tower is what _she_ is, and I'll be hanged if this
isn't a hint to you to mount, yourself, into just such another; under the
same provocation, I fancy her pleading, as she has in her own case taken for
sufficient." Thus it was that, suddenly more brilliant than ever yet, to
Graham's apprehension, you might well have guessed, his friend stood nearer
again -- stood verily quite irradiating responsive ingenuity. Markedly would
it have struck you that at such instants as this, most of all, the general
hush that was so thick about them pushed upward and still further upward the
fine flower of the inferential. Following the pair closely from the first, and
beginning perhaps with your idea that this life of the intelligence had its
greatest fineness in Gray Fielder, you would by now, I dare say, have been
brought to a more or less apprehensive foretaste of its possibilities in our
other odd agent. For how couldn't [210] it have been to the full stretch of
his elastic imagination that Haughty was drawn out by the time of his putting
a certain matter beautifully to his companion? "Don't I, 'gad, take the thing
straight over from you -- all of it you've been trying to convey to me here!
-- when I see you, up in the blue, behind your parapet, just gracefully
lean over and call down to where I mount guard at your door in the dust and
comparative darkness? It's well to understand" -- his thumbs now in his
waistcoat-holes he measured his idea as if Gray's own face fairly reflected
it: "you want me to take _all_ the trouble for you simply, in order that you
may have all the fun. And you want me at the same time, in order that things
shall be for you at their ideal of the easiest, to make you believe, as a
salve to your conscience, that the fun _isn't_ so mixed with the trouble
as that you can't have it, on the right arrangement made with me, quite by
itself. This is most ingenious of you," Horton added, "but it doesn't in the
least show me, don't you see? where _my_ fun comes in."
  "I wonder if I can do that," Gray returned, "without making you understand
first something of the nature of mine -- or for that matter without my first
understanding myself perhaps what my queer kind of it is most likely to be."
  His companion showed withal for more and more ready to risk amused
recognitions. "You _are_ [211] 'rum' with your queer kinds, and might make my
flesh creep, in these conditions, if it weren't for something in me of rude
pluck." Gray, in speaking, had moved towards the great French _meuble_ with
some design upon it or upon the charge it carried; which Horton's eyes just
wonderingly noted -- and to the effect of an exaggeration of tone in his next
remark. "However, there are assurances one doesn't keep repeating: it's so
little in me, I feel, to refuse you any service I'm capable of, no matter how
clumsily, that if you take me but confidently enough for the agent even of
your unholiest pleasures, you'll find me still putting them through for you
when you've broken down in horror yourself."
  "Of course it's my idea that whatever I ask you shall be of interest to
you, and of the liveliest, in itself -- quite apart from any virtue of my
connection with it. If it speaks to you that way so much the better," Gray
went on, standing now before the big _bahut_ with both hands raised and
resting on the marble top. This lifted his face almost to the level of the
base of his perched treasure -- so that he stared at the ivory tower without
as yet touching it. He only continued to talk, though with his thought, as he
brought out the rest of it, almost superseded by the new preoccupation. "I
shall absolutely decline any good of anything that isn't attended by some
equivalent or -- what do you call it? -- proportionate good [212] for you. I
shall propose to you a percentage, if that's the right expression, on every
blest benefit I get from you in the way of the sense of safety." Gray now
moved his hands, laying them as in finer fondness to either smoothly-plated
side of the tall repository, against which a finger or two caressingly rubbed.
His back turned therefore to Horton, he was divided between the growth of his
response to him and that of this more sensible beauty. "Don't I kind of insure
my life, my moral consciousness, I mean, for your advantage? -- or _with_ you,
as it were, taking you for the office-man or actuary, if I'm not muddling: to
whom I pay a handsome premium for the certainty of there being to my credit,
on my demise, a sufficient sum to clear off my debts and bury me."
  "You propose to me a handsome premium? Catch me," Horton laughed, "not
jumping at _that_!"
  "Yes, and you'll of course fix the premium yourself." But Gray was now quite
detached, occupied only in opening his ivory doors with light fingers and then
playing these a little, whether for hesitation or for the intenser pointing of
inquiry, up and down the row of drawers so exposed. Against the topmost they
then rested a moment -- drawing out this one, however, with scant further
delay and enabling themselves to feel within and so become possessed of
an article contained. It was with this article in his hand that [213] he
presently faced about again, turning it over, resting his eyes on it and
then raising them to his visitor, who perceived in it a heavy letter, duly
addressed, to all appearance, but not stamped and as yet unopened. "The
distinguished retreat, you see, _has_ its tenant."
  "Do you mean by its tenant the author of those evidently numerous pages?
-- unless you rather mean," Horton asked, "that you seal up in packets the
love-letters addressed to you and find that charming receptacle a congruous
place to keep them? Is there a packet in every drawer, and do you take them
out this way to remind yourself fondly that you have them and that it mayn't
be amiss for me to feel your conquests and their fine old fragrance dangled
under my nose?"
  Our young man, at these words, had but returned to the consideration of his
odd property, attaching it first again to the superscription and then to the
large firm seal. "I haven't the least idea what this is; and I'm divided in
respect of it, I don't mind telling you, between curiosity and repulsion."
  Horton then also eyed the ambiguity, but at his discreet distance and
reaching out for it as little as his friend surrendered it. "Do you appeal to
me by chance to help you to decide either way?"
  Poor Gray, still wondering and fingering, had a long demur. "No -- I don't
think I want to [214] decide." With which he again faced criticism. "The
extent, Vinty, to which I think I must just _like_ to drift---!"
  Vinty seemed for a moment to give this indicated quantity the attention
invited to it, but without more action for the case than was represented by
his next saying: "Why then do you produce your question -- apparently so much
for my benefit?"
  "Because in the first place you noticed the place it lurks in, and because
in the second I like to tell you things."
  This might have struck us as making the strained note in Vinty's smile more
marked. "But that's exactly, confound you, what you _don't_ do! Here have I
been with you half an hour without your practically telling me anything!"
  Graham, very serious, stood a minute looking at him hard; succeeding also
quite it would seem in taking his words not in the least for a reproach
but for a piece of information of the greatest relevance, and thus at once
dismissing any minor importance. He turned back with his minor importance to
his small open drawer, laid it within again and, pushing the drawer to, closed
the doors of the cabinet. The act disposed of the letter, but had the air of
introducing as definite a statement as Horton could have dreamt of. "It's a
bequest from Mr Gaw."
  "A bequest" -- Horton wondered -- "of banknotes?" [215]
  "No -- it's a letter addressed to me just before his death, handed me by his
daughter, to whom he intrusted it, and not likely, I think, to contain money.
He was then sure, apparently, of my coming in for money; and even if he hadn't
been would have had no ground on earth for leaving me anything."
  Horton's visible interest was yet consonant with its waiting a little for
expression. "He leaves you the great Rosanna."
  Graham, at this, had a stare, followed by a flush as the largest possible
sense of it came out. "You suppose it perhaps the expression of a wish---?"
And then as Horton forbore at first as to what he supposed: "A wish that I
may find confidence to apply to his daughter for her hand?"
  "That hasn't occurred to you before?" Horton asked -- "nor the measure of
the confidence suggested been given you by the fact of your receiving the
document from Rosanna herself? You do give me, you extraordinary person," he
gaily proceeded, "as good opportunities as I could possibly desire to 'help'
you!"
  Graham, for all the felicity of this, needed but an instant to think. "I
have it from Miss Gaw herself that she hasn't an idea of what the letter
contains -- any more than she has the least desire that I shall for the
present open it."
  "Well, mayn't that very attitude in her rather point to a suspicion?" was
his guest's ingenious [216] reply. "Nothing could be less like her certainly
than to appear in such a case to want to force your hand. It makes her
position -- with exquisite filial piety, you see -- extraordinarily delicate."
  Prompt as that might be, Gray appeared to show, no sportive sophistry,
however charming, could work upon him. "Why should Mr Gaw want me to marry his
daughter?"
  Horton again hung about a little. "Why should you be so afraid of
ascertaining his idea that you don't so much as peep into what he writes on
the subject?"
  "Afraid? _Am_ I afraid?" Gray fairly spoke with a shade of the hopeful, as
if even that would be richer somehow than drifting.
  "Well, you looked at your affair just now as you might at some small
dangerous, some biting or scratching, animal whom you're not at all sure of."
  "And yet you see I keep him about."
  "Yes -- you keep him in his cage, for which I suppose you have a key."
  "I have indeed a key, a charming little golden key." With which Gray took
another turn; once more facing criticism, however, to say with force: "He
hated him most awfully!"
  Horton appeared to wonder. "Your uncle hated old Gaw?"
  "No -- I don't think _he_ cared. I speak of Mr Gaw's own animus. He disliked
so mortally his [217] old associate, the man who lies dead upstairs -- and in
spite of my consideration for him I still preserve his record."
  "How do you know about his hate," Horton asked, "or if your letter, since
you haven't read it, _is_ a record?"
  "Well, I don't trust it -- I mean not to be. I don't see what else he could
have written me about. Besides," Gray added, "I've my personal impression."
  "Of old Gaw? You had seen him then?"
  "I saw him out there on this verandah, where he was hovering in the most
extraordinary fashion, a few hours before his death. It was only for a few
minutes," Gray said -- "but they were minutes I shall never forget."
  Horton's interest, though so deeply engaged, was not unattended with
perplexity. "You mean he expressed to you such a feeling at such an hour?"
  "He expressed to me in about three minutes, without speech, to which it
seemed he couldn't trust himself, as much as it might have taken him, or
taken anyone else, to express in three months at another time and on another
subject. If you ever yourself saw him," Gray went on, "perhaps you'll
understand."
  "Oh I often saw him -- and should indeed in your place perhaps have
understood. I never heard him accused of not making people do so. [218] But
you hold," said Horton, "that he must have backed up for you further the
mystic revelation?"
  "He had written before he saw me -- written on the chance of my being a
person to be affected by it; and after seeing me he didn't destroy or keep
back his message, but emphasised his wish for a punctual delivery."
  "By which it is evident," Horton concluded, "that you struck him exactly
_as_ such a person."
  "He saw me, by my idea, as giving my attention to what he had there ready
for me." Gray clearly had talked himself into possession of his case. "That's
the sort of person I succeeded in seeming to him -- though I can assure you
without my the least wanting to."
  "What you feel is then that he thought he _might_ attack with some sort of
shock for you the character of your uncle?" Vinty's question had a special
straightness.
  "What I feel is that he has so attacked it, shock or no shock, and that that
thing in my cabinet, which I haven't examined, can only be the proof."
  It gave Horton much to turn over. "But your conviction has an extraordinary
bearing. Do I understand that the thing was handed you by your friend with a
knowledge of its contents?"
  "Don't, please," Gray said at once, "understand anything either so hideous
or so impossible. She but carried out a wish uttered on her father's [219]
deathbed, and hasn't so much as suggested that I break the portentous seal. I
think in fact," he assured himself, "that she greatly prefers I shouldn't."
  "Which fact," Horton observed, "but adds of course to your curiosity."
  Gray's look at him betrayed on this a still finer interest in _his_
interest. "You see the limits in me of that passion."
  "Well, my dear chap, I've seen greater limits to many things than your
having your little secret tucked away under your thumb. Do you mind my
asking," Horton risked, "whether what deters you from action -- and by action
I mean opening your letter -- is just a real apprehension of the effect
designed by the good gentleman? Do you feel yourself exposed, by the nature
of your mind or any presumption on Gaw's behalf, to give credit, vulgarly
speaking, to whatever charge or charges he may bring?"
  Gray weighed the question, his wide dark eyes would have told us, in his
choicest silver scales. "Neither the nature of my mind, bless it, nor the
utmost force of any presumption to the contrary, prevents my having found my
uncle, in his wonderful latest development, the very most charming person that
I've ever seen in my life. Why he impressed me as a model of every virtue."
  "I confess I don't see," said Horton, "how a relative so behaving could
have failed to endear [220] himself. With such convictions why don't you risk
looking?"
  Gray was but for a moment at a loss -- he quite undertook to know. "Because
the whole thing would be so horrible. I mean the question itself is -- and
even our here and at such a time discussing it."
  "Nothing is horrible -- to the point of making one quake," Horton opined,
"that falls to the ground with a smash from the moment one drops it. The sense
of your document is exactly what's to be appreciated. It would have no sense
at all if you didn't believe."
  Gray considered, but still differed. "Yes, to find it merely vindictive and
base, and thereby to have to take it for false, that would still be an odious
experience."
  "Then why the devil don't you simply destroy the thing?" Horton at last
quite impatiently inquired.
  Gray showed perhaps he had scarce a reason, but had, to the very brightest
effect, an answer. "That's just what I want you to help me to. To help me,
that is," he explained, "after a little to decide for."
  "After a little?" wondered Horton. "After how long?"
  "Well, after long enough for me to feel sure I don't act in fear. I don't
want," he went on as in fresh illustration of the pleasure taken by [221] him,
to the point, as it were, of luxury, in feeling no limit to his companion's
comprehension, or to the patience involved in it either, amusedly as Horton
might at moments attempt to belie that, adding thereby to the whole service
something still more spacious -- "I don't want to act in fear of anything or
of anyone whatever; I said to myself at home three weeks ago, or whenever,
that it wasn't for that I was going to come over; and I propose therefore,
you see, to know so far as possible where I am and what I'm about: morally
speaking at least, if not financially."
  His friend but looked at him again on this in rather desperate diversion. "I
don't see how you're to know where you are, I confess, if you take no means to
find out."
  "Well, my acquisition of property seems by itself to promise me information,
and for the understanding of the lesson I shall have to take a certain time.
What I want," Gray finely argued, "is to act but in the light of that."
  "In the light of time? Then why do you begin by so oddly wasting it?"
  "Because I think it may be the only way for me not to waste understanding.
Don't be afraid," he went on, moving as by the effect of Horton's motion,
which had brought that subject of appeal a few steps nearer the rare
repository, "that I shall commit the extravagance of at all wasting _you_."
[222]
  Horton, from where he had paused, looked up at the ivory tower; though
as Gray was placed in the straight course of approach to it he had after a
fashion to catch and meet his eyes by the way. "What you really want of me,
it's clear, is to help you to fidget and fumble -- or in other words to
prolong the most absurd situation; and what I ought to do, if you'd believe it
of me, is to take that stuff out of your hands and just deal with it myself."
  "And what do you mean by dealing with it yourself?"
  "Why destroying it unread by either of us -- which," said Horton, looking
about, "I'd do in a jiffy, on the spot, if there were only a fire in that
grate. The place is clear, however, and we've matches; let me chuck your
letter in and enjoy the blaze with you."
  "Ah, my dear man, don't! Don't!" Gray repeated, putting it rather as a plea
for indulgence than as any ghost of a defiance, but instinctively stepping
backward in defence of his treasure.
  His companion, for a little, gazed at the cabinet, in speculation, it might
really have seemed, as to an extraordinary reach of arm. "You positively
prefer to hug the beastly thing?"
  "Let me alone," Gray presently returned, "and you'll probably find I've
hugged it to death."
  Horton took, however, on his side, a moment for further reflection. "I
thought what you [223] wanted of me to be exactly _not_ that I should let you
alone, but that I should give you on the contrary my very best attention."
  "Well," Gray found felicity to answer, "I feel that you'll see how your very
best attention will sometimes consist in your not at all minding me."
  So then for the minute Horton looked as if he took it. The great clock on
the mantel appeared to have stopped with the stop of its late owner's life; so
that he eyed his watch and startled at the hour to which they had talked. He
put out his hand for good-night, and this returned grasp held them together in
silence a minute. Something then in his sense of the situation determined his
breaking out with an intensity not yet produced in him. "Yes -- you're really
prodigious. I mean for trust in a fellow. For upon my honour you know nothing
whatever about me."
  "That's quite what I mean," said Gray -- "that I suffer from my ignorance of
so much that's important, and want naturally to correct it."
  "'Naturally'?" his visitor gloomed.
  "Why, I do know _this_ about you, that when we were together with old Roulet
at Neuch^atel and, off on our _cours_ that summer, had strayed into a high
place, in the Oberland, where I was ass enough to have slid down to a scrap
of a dizzy ledge, and so hung helpless over the void, unable to get back, in
horror of staying and in greater [224] horror of _not_, you got near enough to
me, at the risk of your life, to lower to me the rope we so luckily had with
us and that made an effort of my own possible by my managing to pass it under
my arms. You helped that effort from a place of vantage above that nobody but
you, in your capacity for playing up, would for a moment have taken for one,
and you so hauled and steadied and supported me, in spite of your almost equal
exposure, that little by little I climbed, I scrambled, my absolute confidence
in you helping, for it amounted to inspiration, and got near to where you
were."
  "From which point," said Horton, whom this reminiscence had kept gravely
attentive, "you in your turn rendered me such assistance, I remember, though I
can't for the life of me imagine how you contrived, that the tables were quite
turned and I shouldn't in the least have got out of my fix without you."
He now pulled up short however; he stood a moment looking down. "It isn't
pleasant to remember."
  "It wouldn't," Gray judged, "be pleasant to forget. You gave proof of
extraordinary coolness."
  Horton still had his eyes on the ground. "We both kept our heads. I grant
it's a decent note for us."
  "If you mean we were associated in keeping our heads, you kept mine," Gray
remarked, "much more than I kept yours. I should be without a [225] head
to-day if you hadn't seen so to my future, just as I should be without a
heart, you must really let me remark, if I didn't look now to your past. I
consider that to know that fact in it takes me of itself well-nigh far enough
in appreciation of you for my curiosity, even at its most exasperated, to
rest on a bed of roses. However, my imagination itself," Gray still more
beautifully went on, "insists on making additions -- since how can't it, for
that matter, picture again the rate at which it made them then? I hadn't even
at the time waited for you to save my life in order to think you a swell. If I
thought you the biggest kind of one, and if in your presence now I see just as
much as ever _why_ I did, what does that amount to but that my mind _isn't_ a
blank about you?"
  "Well, if mine had ever been one about you," said Horton, once more facing
it, "our so interesting conversation here would have sufficed to cram it full.
The least I can make of you, whether for your protection or my profit, is just
that you're insanely romantic."
  "Romantic -- yes," Gray smiled; "but oh, but _oh_, so systematically!"
  "It's your system that's exactly your madness. How can you take me, without
a stroke of success, without a single fact of performance, to my credit, for
anything but an abject failure? You're in possession of no faintest sign,
kindly note, that I'm not a mere impudent ass." [226]
  Gray accepted this reminder, for all he showed to the contrary, in the
admiring spirit in which he might have regarded a splendid somersault or
an elegant trick with cards; indulging, that is, by his appearance, in the
forward bend of attention to it, but then falling back to more serious ground.
"It's my romance that's itself my reason; by which I mean that I'm never so
reasonable, so deliberate, so lucid and so capable -- to call myself capable
at any hour! -- as when I'm most romantic. I'm methodically and consistently
so, and nothing could make and keep me, for any dealings with me, I hold, more
conveniently safe and quiet. You see that you can lead me about by a string if
you'll only tie it to my appropriate finger -- which you'll find out, if you
don't mind the trouble, by experience of the wrong ones, those where the
attachment won't 'act'." He drew breath to give his friend the benefit of
this illustration, but another connection quickly caught him up. "How can you
pretend to suggest that you're in these parts the faintest approach to an
insignificant person? How can you pretend that you're not as clever as you
can stick together, and with the cleverness of the right kind? For there are
odious kinds, I know -- the kind that redresses other people's stupidity
instead of sitting upon it."
  "I'll answer you those questions," Horton good-humouredly said, "as soon
as you tell me [227] how you've come by your wonderful ground for them. Till
you're able to do that I shall resent your torrent of abuse. The appalling
creature you appear to wish to depict!"
  "Well, you're simply a _figure_ -- what I call -- in all the force of the
term; one has only to look at you to see it, and I shall give up drawing
conclusions from it only when I give up looking. You can make out that there's
nothing in a prejudice," Gray developed, "for a prejudice may be, or must be,
so to speak, single-handed; but you can't not count with a relation -- I mean
one you're a party to, because a relation is exactly a _fact_ of reciprocity.
Our reciprocity, which exists and which makes me a party to it by existing for
my benefit, just as it makes you one by existing for yours, can't possibly
result in your not 'figuring' to me, don't you see? with the most admirable
intensity. And I simply decline," our young man wound up, "not to believe
tremendous things of any subject of a relation of mine."
  "'Any' subject?" Vinty echoed in a tone that showed how intelligently he had
followed. "That condition, I'm afraid," he smiled, "will cut down not a little
your general possibilities of relation." And then as if this were cheap talk,
but a point none the less remained: "In this country one's a figure (whatever
you may mean by that!) on easy terms; and if I correspond to your idea of the
phenomenon you'll have much to do -- I won't say [228] for my simple self, but
for the comfort of your mind -- to make your fond imagination fit the funny
facts. You pronounce me an awful swell -- which, like everything else over
here, has less weight of sense in it for the saying than it could have
anywhere else; but what barest evidence have you of any positive trust in me
shown on any occasion or in any connection by one creature you can name?"
  "Trust?" -- Gray looked at the red tip of the cigarette between his fingers.
  "Trust, trust, trust!"
  Well, it didn't take long to say. "What do you call it but trust that such
people as the Bradhams, and all the people here, as he tells me, receive you
with open arms?"
  "Such people as the Bradhams and as 'all the people here'!" -- Horton beamed
on him for the beauty of that. "Such authorities and such 'figures', such
allegations, such perfections and such proofs! Oh," he said, "I'm going to
have great larks with you!"
  "You give me then the evidence I want in the very act of challenging me
for it. What better proof of your situation and your character than your
possession exactly of such a field for whatever you like, of such a dish for
serving me up? Mr Bradham, as you know," Gray continued, "was this morning
so good as to pay me a visit, and the form in which he put your glory to me
[229] -- because we talked of you ever so pleasantly -- was that, by his
appreciation, you know your way about the place better than all the rest of
the knowing put together."
  Horton smiled, smoked, kept his hands in his pockets. "Dear deep old Davey!"
  "Yes," said Gray consistently, "isn't he a wise old specimen? It's rather
horrid for me having thus to mention, as if you had applied to me for a place,
that I've picked up a good 'character' of you, but since you insist on it he
assured me that I couldn't possibly have a better friend."
  "Well, he's a most unscrupulous old person and ought really to be ashamed.
What it comes to," Haughty added, "is that though I've repeatedly stayed with
them they've to the best of his belief never missed one of the spoons. The
fact is that even if they had poor Davey wouldn't know it."
  "He doesn't take care of the spoons?" Gray asked in a tone that made his
friend at once swing round and away. He appeared to note an unexpectedness in
this, yet, 'out' as he was for unexpectedness, it could grow, on the whole,
clearly, but to the raising of his spirits. "Well, I shall take care of _my_
loose valuables and, unwarned by the Bradhams and likely to have such things
to all appearance in greater number than ever before, what can I do but
persist in my notion of asking you to keep with me, at your convenience, [230]
some proper count of them?" After which as Horton's movement had carried him
quite to the far end of the room, where the force of it even detained him
a little, Gray had him again well in view for his return, and was prompted
thereby to a larger form of pressure. "How can you pretend to palm off on me
that women mustn't in prodigious numbers 'trust' you?"
  Haughty made of his shoulders the most prodigious hunch. "What importance,
under the sun, has the trust of women -- in numbers however prodigious? It's
never what's best in a man they trust -- it's exactly what's worst, what's
most irrelevant to anything or to any class but themselves. Their _kind_ of
confidence," he further elucidated, "is concerned only with the effect of
their own operations or with those to which they are subject; it has no light
either for a man's other friends or for his enemies: it proves nothing about
him but in that particular and wholly detached relation. So neither hate me
nor like me, please, for anything any woman may tell you."
  Horton's hand had on this renewed and emphasised its proposal of good-night;
to which his host acceded with the remark: "What superfluous precautions you
take!"
  "How can you call them superfluous," he asked in answer to this, "when
you've been taking them at such a rate yourself? -- in the interest, I mean,
[231] of trying to persuade me that you can't stand on your feet?"
  "It hasn't been to show you that I'm silly about life -- which is what
you've just been talking of. It has only been to show you that I'm silly about
affairs," Gray said as they went at last through the big bedimmed hall to the
house doors, which stood open to the warm summer night under the protection of
the sufficient outward reaches.
  "Well, what are affairs but life?" Vinty, at the top of the steps, sought to
know.
  "You'll make me feel, no doubt, how much they are -- which would be very
good for me. Only life isn't affairs -- that's _my_ subtle distinction," Gray
went on.
  "I'm not sure, I'm not sure!" said Horton while he looked at the stars.
  "Oh rot -- _I_ am!" Gray happily declared; to which he the next moment
added: "What it makes you contend for, you see, is the fact of my silliness."
  "Well, what is that but the most splendid fact about you, you jolly old
sage?" -- and his visitor, getting off, fairly sprang into the shade of the
shrubberies.


                          B O O K   F O U R T H

[232]
                             -=-=-  1  -=-=-

Again and again, during the fortnight that followed his uncle's death, were
his present and his future to strike our young man as an extraordinary blank
cheque signed by Mr Betterman and which, from the moment he accepted it at
all, he must fill out, according to his judgment, his courage and his faith,
with figures, monstrous, fantastic, almost cabalistic, that it seemed to him
he should never learn to believe in. It was not so much the wonder of there
being in various New York institutions strange deposits of money, to amounts
that, like familiar mountain masses, appeared to begin at the blue horizon
and, sloping up and up toward him, grew bigger and bigger the nearer he or
they got, till they fairly overhung him with their purple power to meet
whatever drafts upon them should make; it was not the tone, the climax of
dryness, of that dryest of men Mr Crick, whose answering remark as to any and
every particular presumption of credit was "Well, I guess I've [233] fixed
it so as you'll find _something_ there"; that sort of thing was of course
fairytale enough in itself, was all the while and in a hundred connections a
sweet assault on his credulity, but was at the same time a phase of experience
comparatively vulgar and that tended to lose its edge with repetition. The
real, the overwhelming sense of his adventure was much less in the fact that
he could lisp in dollars, as it were, and see the dollars come, than in those
vast vague quantities, those spreading tracts, of his own consciousness
itself on which his kinsman's prodigious perversity had imposed, as for his
exploration, the aspect of a boundless capital. This trust of the dead man in
his having a nature that would show to advantage under a bigger strain than
it had ever dreamed of meeting, and the corresponding desolate freedom on his
own part to read back into the mystery such refinements either, or such crude
candours, of meaning and motive as might seem best to fit it, _that_ was the
huge vague inscribable sum which ran up into the millions and for which the
signature that lettered itself to the last neatness wherever his mind's eye
rested was 'good' enough to reduce any more casual sign in the scheme of
nature or of art to the state of a negligible blur. Mr Crick's want of colour,
as Gray qualified this gentleman's idiosyncrasy from the moment he saw how it
would be their one point of contact, became, by the extreme rarity and clarity
with which it [234] couldn't but affect him, the very most gorgeous gem, of
the ruby or topaz order, that the smooth forehead of the actual was for the
present to flash upon him.
  For dry did it appear inevitable to take the fact of a person's turning up,
from New York, with no other retinue than an attendant scribe in a straw hat,
a few hours before his uncle's last one, and being beholden to mere Miss
Mumby for simple introduction to Gray as Mr Betterman's lawyer. So had such
sparenesses and barenesses of form to register themselves for a mind beset
with the tradition that consequences were always somehow voluminous things;
and yet the dryness was of a sort, Gray soon apprehended, that he might take
up in handfuls, as if it had been the very sand of the Sahara, and thereby
find in it, at the least exposure to light, the collective shimmer of
myriads of fine particles. It was with the substance of the desert taken
as monotonously sparkling under any motion to dig in it that the abyss of
Mr Crick's functional efficiency was filled. That efficiency, in respect to
the things to be done, would clearly so answer to any demand upon it within
the compass of our young man's subtlety, that the result for him could only be
a couple of days of inexpressible hesitation as to the outward air he himself
should be best advised to aim at wearing. He reminded himself at this crisis
of the proprietor of a garden, newly acquired, who might walk about with his
gardener and try to combine, in presence of [235] abounding plants and the
vast range of luxuriant nature, an ascertainment of names and properties and
processes with a dissimulation, for decent appearance, of the positive side of
his cockneyism. By no imagination of a state of mind so unfurnished would the
gardener ever have been visited; such gaping seams in the garment of knowledge
must affect him at the worst as mere proprietary languor, the offhandness of
repletion; and no effective circumvention of traditional takings for granted
could late-born curiosity therefore achieve. Gray's hesitation ceased only
when he had decided that he needn't care, comparatively speaking, for what
Mr Crick might think of him. He was going to care for what others might
-- this at least he seemed restlessly to apprehend; he was going to care
tremendously, he felt himself make out, for what Rosanna Gaw might, for what
Horton Vint might -- even, it struck him, for what Davey Bradham might. But in
presence of Mr Crick, who insisted on having no more personal identity than
the omnibus conductor stopping before you but just long enough to bite into
a piece of pasteboard with a pair of small steel jaws, the question of his
having a character either to keep or to lose declined all relevance -- and for
the reason in especial that whichever way it might turn for him would remain
perhaps, so to speak, the most unexpressed thing that should ever have
happened in the world. [236]
  The effect producible by him on the persons just named, and extending
possibly to whole groups of which these were members, would be an effect
because somehow expressed and encountered as expression: when had he in all
his life, for example, so lived in the air of expression and so depended
on the help of it, as in that so thrilling night-hour just spent with the
mystifying and apparently mystified, yet also apparently attached and, with
whatever else, attaching, Vinty? It wasn't that Mr Crick, whose analogue he
had met on every occasion of his paying his fare in the public conveyances --
where the persons to whom he paid it, without perhaps in their particulars
resembling each other, all managed nevertheless to be felt as gathered into
this reference -- wasn't in a high degree conversible; it was that the more he
conversed the less Gray found out what he thought not only of Mr Betterman's
heir but of any other subject on which they touched. The gentleman who would,
by Gray's imagination, have been acting for the executors of his uncle's will
had not that precious document appeared to dispense with every superfluity,
could state a fact, under any rash invitation, and endow it, as a fact, with
the greatest conceivable amplitude -- this too moreover not because he was
garrulous or gossiping, but because those facts with which he was acquainted,
the only ones on which you would have dreamed of appealing to [237] him,
seemed all perfect nests or bags of other facts, bristling or bulging thus
with every intensity of the positive and leaving no room in their interstices
for mere appreciation to so much as turn round. They were themselves
appreciation -- they became so by the simple force of their existing for
Mr Crick's arid mention, and they so covered the ground of his consciousness
to the remotest edge that no breath of the air either of his own mind or of
anyone's else could have pretended to circulate about them. Gray made the
reflection -- tending as he now felt himself to waste rather more than less
time in this idle trick -- that the different matters of content in some
misunderstandings have so glued themselves together that separation has quite
broken down and one continuous block, suggestive of dimensional squareness,
with mechanical perforations and other aids to use subsequently introduced,
comes to represent the whole life of the subject. What it amounted to, he
might have gathered, was that Mr Crick was of such a common commonness as he
had never up to now seen so efficiently embodied, so completely organised,
so securely and protectedly active, in a word -- not to say so garnished and
adorned with strange refinements of its own: he had somehow been used to
thinking of the extreme of that quality as a note of defeated application,
just as the extreme of rarity would have to be. His domestic companion of
[238] these days again and again struck him as most touching the point at
issue, and that point alone, when most proclaiming at every pore that there
wasn't a difference, in all the world, between one thing and another. The
refusal of his whole person to figure as a fact invidiously distinguishable,
that of his aspect to have an identity, of his eyes to have a consciousness,
of his hair to have a colour, of his nose to have a form, of his mouth to
have a motion, of his voice to consent to any separation of sounds, made
intercourse with him at once extremely easy and extraordinarily empty; it was
deprived of the flicker of anything by the way and resembled the act of moving
forward in a perfectly-rolling carriage with the blind of each window neatly
drawn down.
  Gray sometimes advanced to the edge of trying him, so to call it, as to the
impression made on him by lack of recognitions assuredly without precedent in
any experience, any, least of all, of the ways of beneficiaries; but under the
necessity on each occasion of our young man's falling back from the vanity of
supposing himself really presentable or apprehensible. For a grasp of him on
such ground to take place he should have had first to show himself and to
catch his image somehow reflected; simply walking up and down and shedding
bland gratitude didn't convey or exhibit or express him in this case, as he
was sure these things _had_ on the other hand truly done [239] where everyone
else, where his uncle and Rosanna, where Mr Gaw and even Miss Mumby, where
splendid Vinty, whom he so looked to, and awfully nice Davey Bradham, whom he
so took to, were concerned. It all came back to the question of terms and to
the perception, in varying degrees, on the part of these persons, of his own;
for there were somehow none by which Mr Crick was penetrable that would really
tell anything about him, and he could wonder in freedom if he wasn't then to
know too that last immunity from any tax on his fortune which would consist in
his having never to wince. Against wincing in other relations than this one
he was prepared, he only desired, to take his precautions -- visionary
precautions in those connections truly swarming upon him; but apparently he
was during these first days of the mere grossness of his reality to learn
something of the clear state of seeing every fond sacrifice to superstition
that he could think of thrust back at him. If he could but have brought his
visitor to say after twenty-four hours of him 'Well, you're the damnedest
little idiot I've ever had to pretend to hold commerce with!' _that_ would on
the spot have pressed the spring of his rich sacrificial 'Oh I must be, I must
be! -- how can I not abjectly and gratefully be?' Something at least would so
have been done to placate the jealous gods. But instead of that the grossness
of his reality just flatly included this supremely [240] useful friend's
perhaps supposing him a vulgar voluptuary, or at least a mere gaping maw,
cynically, which amounted to say frivolously, indifferent to everything but
the general fact of his windfall. Strange that it should be impossible in any
particular whatever to inform or to correct Mr Crick, who sat unapproachable
in the midst of the only knowledge that concerned him.
  He couldn't help feeling it conveyed in the very breath of the summer airs
that played about him, to his fancy, in a spirit of frolic still lighter and
quicker than they had breathed in other climes, he couldn't help almost seeing
it as the spray of sea-nymphs, or hearing it as the sounded horn of Tritons,
emerging, to cast their spell, from the foam-flecked tides around, that he
was regarded as a creature rather unnaturally 'quiet' there on his averted
verandahs and in his darkened halls, even at moments when quite immense
things, by his own measure, were happening to him. Everything, simply, seemed
to be happening, and happening all at once -- as he could say to himself, for
instance, by the fact of such a mere matter as his pulling up at some turn of
his now renewedly ceaseless pacing to take in he could scarce have said what
huge though soft collective rumble, what thick though dispersed exhalation, of
the equipped and appointed life, the life that phrased itself with sufficient
assurance as the multitudinous throb of Newport, borne toward [241] him from
vague regions, from behind and beyond his temporary blest barriers, and
representing for the first time in his experience an appeal directed at him
from a source not somewhat shabbily single. An impression like that was in
itself an event -- so repeatedly in his other existence (it was already his
quite unconnectedly other) had the rumour of the world, the voice of society,
the harmonies of possession, been charged, for his sensibility, with reminders
which, so far from suggesting association, positively waved him off from it.
Mr Betterman's funeral, for all the rigour of simplicity imposed on it by
his preliminary care, had enacted itself in a ponderous, numerous, in fact
altogether swarming and resounding way; the old local cemetery on the
seaward-looking hillside, as Gray seemed to identify it, had served for the
final scene, and our young man's sense of the whole thing reached its finest
point in an unanswered question as to whether the New York business world or
the New York newspaper interest were the more copiously present. The business
world broke upon him during the recent rites in large smooth tepid waves --
he was conscious of a kind of generalised or, as they seemed to be calling
it, standardised face, as of sharpness without edge, save when edge was
unexpectedly improvised, bent upon him for a hint of what might have been
better expressed could it but have been expressed humorously; while the
newspaper [242] interest only fed the more full, he felt even at the time,
from the perfectly bare plate offered its flocking young emissaries by the
most recognising eye at once and the most deprecating dumbness that he could
command.
  He had asked Vinty, on the morrow of Vinty's evening visit, to 'act' for
him in so far as this might be; upon which Vinty had said gaily -- he was
unexceptionally gay now -- "Do you mean as your best man at your marriage to
the bride who is so little like St Francis's? much as you yourself strike me,
you know, as resembling the man of Assisi." Vinty, at his great present ease,
constantly put things in such wonderful ways; which were nothing, however, to
the way he mostly did them during the days he was able to spare before going
off again to other calls, other performances in other places, braver and
breezier places on the bolder northern coast, it mostly seemed: his allusions
to which excited absolutely the more curious interest in his friend, by an odd
law, in proportion as he sketched them, under pressure, as probably altogether
alien to the friend's sympathies. That was to be for the time, by every
indication, his amusing 'line' -- his taking so confident and insistent a
view of what it must be in Gray's nature and tradition to like or not to like
that, as our young man for that matter himself assured him, he couldn't have
invented a more successfully insidious way of [243] creating an appetite than
by passing under a fellow's nose every sort of whiff of the indigestible. One
thing at least was clear, namely: that, let his presumption of a comrade's
susceptibilities, his possible reactions, under general or particular
exposure, approve itself or not, the extent to which this free interpreter was
going personally to signify for the savour of the whole stretched there as
a bright assurance. Thus he was all the while acting indeed -- acting so
that fond formulations of it could only become in the promptest way mere
redundancies of reference; he acted because his approach, his look, his touch
made somehow, by their simply projecting themselves, a definite difference for
any question, great or small, in the least subject to them; and this, after
the most extraordinary fashion, not in the least through his pressing or
interfering or even so much as intending, but just as a consequence of his
having a sense and an intelligence of the given affair, such as it might be,
to which, once he was present at it, he was truly ashamed not to conform. That
concentrated passage between the two men while the author of their situation
was still unburied would of course always hover to memory's eye like a votive
object in the rich gloom of a chapel; but it was now disconnected, attached to
its hook once for all, its whole meaning converted with such small delay into
working, playing force and multiplied tasteable fruit. [244]
  Quiet as he passed for keeping himself, by the impression I have noted, how
could Gray have felt more plunged in history, how could he by his own sense
more have waked up to it each morning and gone to bed with it each night, sat
down to it whenever he did sit down, which was never for long, whether at a
meal, at a book, at a letter, or at the wasted endeavour to become, by way of
a change, really aware of his consciousness, than through positively missing
as he did the hint of anything in particular to do? -- missing and missing it
all the while and yet at no hour paying the least of the penalties that are
supposed to attend the drop of responsibility and the substituted rule of
fatuity. How couldn't it be agitation of a really sublime order to have it
come over one that the personage in the world one must most resemble at such a
pitch would be simply, at one's choice, the Kaiser or the Czar, potentates who
only know their situation is carried on by attestation of the fact that push
it wherever they will they never find it isn't? Thus they are referred to the
existence of machinery, the working of which machinery is answered for, they
may feel, whenever their eyes rest on one of those figures, ministerial or
ceremonial, who may be, as it is called, in waiting. Mr Crick was in waiting,
Horton Vint was in waiting, Rosanna Gaw even, at this moment a hundred miles
away, was in waiting, and so was Davey Bradham, though with but a single
appearance [245] at the palace as yet to his credit. Neither Horton nor
Mr Crick, it was true, were more materially, more recurrently present than a
fellow's nerves, for the wonder of it all, could bear; but what was it but
just _being_ Czar or Kaiser to keep thrilling on one's own side before the
fact that this made no difference? Vulgar reassurance was the greatest of
vulgarities; monarchs could still be irresponsible, thanks to their ministers'
not being, and Gray repeatedly asked himself how he should ever have felt
as he generally did if it hadn't been so absolutely exciting that while the
scattered moments of Horton's presence and the fitful snatches of telephonic
talk with him lasted the gage of protection, perfectly certain patronising
protection, added a still pleasanter light to his eye and ring to his voice,
casual and trivial as he clearly might have liked to keep these things. Great
monarchies might be 'run', but great monarchs weren't -- unless of course
often by the favourite or the mistress; and one hadn't a mistress yet,
goodness knew, and if one was threatened with a favourite it would be but with
a favourite of the people too.
  History and the great life surged in upon our hero through such images as
these at their fullest tide, finding him out however he might have tried to
hide from them, and shaking him perhaps even with no livelier question than
when it occurred to him for the first time within the week, oddly [246]
enough, that the guest of the Bradhams never happened, while his own momentary
guest, to meet Mr Crick, in _his_ counsels, by so much as an instant's
overlapping, any more than it would chance on a single occasion that he should
name his friend to that gentleman or otherwise hint at his existence, still
less his importance. Was it just that the king was _usually_ shy of mentioning
the favourite to the head of the treasury and that various decencies attached,
by tradition, to keeping public and private advisers separate? "Oh I
absolutely decline to come in, at any point whatever, between you and _him_;
as if there were any sort of help I can give you that he won't ever so much
better!" -- those words had embodied, on the morrow, Vinty's sole allusion to
the main sense of their first talk, which he had gone on with in no direct
fashion. He had thrown a ludicrous light on his committing himself to any such
atrocity of taste while the empowered person and quite ideally right man was
about; but points would come up more and more, did come up, in fact already
had, that they doubtless might work out together happily enough; and it took
Horton in fine the very fewest hours to give example after example of his
familiar and immediate wit. Nothing could have better illustrated this than
the interest thrown by him for Gray over a couple of subjects that, with many
others indeed, beguiled three or four rides taken by the friends [247] along
the indented shores and other seaside stretches and reaches of their low-lying
promontory in the freshness of the early morning and when the scene might
figure for themselves alone. Gray, clinging as yet to his own premises very
much even as a stripped swimmer might loiter to enjoy an air-bath before his
dive, had yet mentioned that he missed exercise and had at once found Vinty
full of resource for his taking it in that pleasantest way. Everything, by his
assurance, was going to be delightful but the generality of the people; thus,
accordingly, was the generality of the people not yet in evidence, thus at the
sweet hour following the cool dawn could the world he had become possessed of
spread about him unspoiled.
  It was perhaps in Gray to wonder a little in these conditions what _was_
then in evidence, with decks so invidiously cleared; this being, however, a
remark he forbore to make, mystified as he had several times been, and somehow
didn't like too much being, by having had to note that to differ at all from
Vinty on occasions apparently offered was to provoke in him at once a positive
excess of agreement. He always went further, as it were, and Gray himself, as
he might say, didn't want to go _those_ lengths, which were out of the range
of practical politics altogether. Horton's habit, as it seemed to show itself,
was to make out of saving sociability or wanton ingenuity [248] or whatever, a
distinction for which a companion might care, but for which he himself didn't
with any sincerity, and then to give his own side of it away, from the moment
doubt had been determined, with an almost desolating sweep of surrender. His
own side of it was by that logic no better a side, in a beastly vulgar world,
than any other, and if anyone wanted to mean that such a mundane basis was
deficient why he himself had but meant it from the first and pretended
something else only not to be too shocking. He was ready to mean the worst --
was ready for anything, that is, in the interest of ceasing from humbug. And
if Gray was prepared for _that_ then _il ne s'agissait que de s'entendre_.
What Gray was prepared for would really take, this young man frankly opined,
some threshing out; but it wasn't at all in readiness for the worst that he
had come to America -- he had come on the contrary to indulge, by God's help,
in appreciations, comparisons, observations, reflections and other luxuries,
that were to minister, fond old prejudice aiding, to life at the high pitch,
the pitch, as who should say, of immortality. If on occasion, under the dazzle
of Horton's facility, he might ask himself how he tracked through it the
silver thread of sincerity -- consistency wasn't pretended to -- something at
once supervened that was better than any answer, some benefit of information
that the circumstance required, of judgment [249] that assisted or supported
or even amused, by felicity of contradiction, and that above all pushed the
question so much further, multiplying its relations and so giving it air and
colour and the slap of the brush, that it straightway became a picture and,
for the kind of attention Gray could best render, a conclusive settled matter.
He hated somehow to detract from his friend, wanting so much more to keep
adding to him; but it was after a little as if he had felt that his loyalty,
or whatever he might call it, could yet not be mean in deciding that Horton's
generalisations, his opinions as distinguished from his perceptions and direct
energies and images, signified little enough: if he would only go on bristling
as he promised with instances and items, would only consent to consist at the
same rate and in his very self of material for history, one might propose to
gather from it all at one's own hours and without troubling him the occasional
big inference.
  How good he could be on the particular case appeared for example after Gray
had expressed to him, just subsequently to their first encounter, a certain
light and measured wonderment at Rosanna Gaw's appearing not to intend to
absent herself long enough from her cares in the other State, immense though
these conceivably were, to do what the rest of them were doing roundabout
Mr Betterman's grave. Our young man [250] had half taken for granted that
she would have liked, expressing it simply, to assist with him at the last
attentions to a memory that had meant, in the current phrase, so much for them
both -- though of course he withal quite remembered that her interest in it
had but rested on his own and that since his own, as promoted by her, had now
taken such effect there was grossness perhaps in looking to her for further
demonstrations: this at least in view of her being under her filial stress
not unimaginably sated with ritual. He had caught himself at any rate in the
act of dreaming that Rosanna's return for the funeral would be one of the
inevitabilities of her sympathy with his fortune -- every element of which
(that was overwhelmingly certain) he owed to her; and even the due sense that,
put her jubilation or whatever at its highest, it could scarce be expected to
dance the same jig as his, didn't prevent his remarking to his friend that
clearly Miss Gaw would come, since he himself was still in the stage of
supposing that when you had the consciousness of a lot of money you sort of
did violent things. He played with the idea that her arrival for the interment
would partake of this element, proceeding as it might from the exhilaration of
her monstrous advantages, her now assured state. 'Look at the violent things
_I'm_ doing,' he seemed to observe with this, 'and see how natural I must feel
it that any violence should meet me. Yours, [251] for example' -- Gray really
went so far -- 'recognises how I want, or at least how I enjoy, a harmony;
though at the same time, I assure you, I'm already prepared for any disgusted
snub to the attitude of unlimited concern about me, gracious goodness, that I
may seem to go about taking for granted.' Unlimited concern about him on the
part of the people who weren't up at the cool of dawn save in so far as they
here and there hadn't yet gone to bed -- this, in combination with something
like it on the part of numberless others too, had indeed to be faced as the
inveterate essence of Vinty's forecast, and formed perhaps the hardest nut
handed to Gray's vice of cogitation to crack; it was the thing that he just
now most found himself, as they said, up against -- involving as it did some
conception of reasons other than ugly for so much patience with the boring
side of him.
  An interest founded on the mere beastly fact of his pecuniary luck, what was
that but an ugly thing to see, from the moment his circle, since a circle he
was apparently to have, shouldn't soon be moved to some decent reaction from
it? How was he going himself to like breathing an air in which the reaction
didn't break out, how was he going not to get sick of finding so large a part
played, over the place, by the mere _constatation_, in a single voice, a
huge monotone restlessly and untiringly directed, but otherwise without
application, [252] of the state of being worth dollars to inordinate amounts?
Was he really going to want to live with many specimens of the sort of person
who wouldn't presently rather loathe him than know him blindedly on such
terms? would it be possible, for that matter, that he should feel people
unashamed of not providing for their attention to him any better account of it
than his uncle's form of it had happened to supply, without his by that token
coming to regard them either as very 'interested', according to the good old
word, or as themselves much too foredoomed bores to merit tolerance? When it
reached the pitch of his asking himself whether it could be possible Vinty
wouldn't at once see what he meant by that reservation, he patched the
question up but a bit provisionally perhaps by falling back on a remark about
this confidant that was almost always equally in order. They weren't on the
basis yet of any treatable reality, any that could be directly handled and
measured, other than such as were, so to speak, the very children of accident,
those the old man's still unexplained whim had with its own special shade of
grimness let him in for. _Naturally_ must it come to pass with time that the
better of the set among whom this easy genius was the best would stop thinking
money about him to the point that prevented their thinking anything else -- so
that he should only break off and not go in further after giving them a chance
to show in a [253] less flurried way to what their range of imagination might
reach invited and encouraged. Should they markedly fail to take that chance it
would be all up with them so far as any entertainment that _he_ should care to
offer them was concerned. How could it stick out _more_ disconcertingly -- so
his appeal might have run -- that a fuss about him was as yet absolutely a
fuss on a vulgar basis? having begun, by what he gathered, quite before the
growth even of such independent rumours as Horton's testimony, once he was on
the spot, or as Mr Bradham's range of anecdote, consequent on Mr Bradham's
call, might give warrant for: it couldn't have behind it, he felt sure, so
much as a word of Rosanna's, of the heralding or promising sort -- he would
so have staked his right hand on the last impossibility of the least rash
overflow on that young woman's part.
  There was this other young woman, of course, whom he heard of at these hours
for the first time from Haughty and whom he remembered well enough to have
heard praise of from his adopted father, three or four years previous, on his
rejoining the dear man after a summer's separation. She would be, 'Gussy's'
charming friend, Haughty's charming friend, no end of other people's charming
friend, as appeared, the heroine of the charming friendship his own admirable
friend had formed, in a characteristically headlong manner (some exceptional
cluster of graces, in [254] her case, clearly much aiding) with a young
American girl, the very nicest anyone had ever seen, met at the waters of
Ragatz during one of several seasons there and afterwards described in such
extravagant terms as were to make her remain, between himself and his elder,
a subject of humorous reference and retort. It had had to do with Gray's
liking his companion of those years always better and better that persons
intrinsically distinguished inveterately took to him so naturally -- even if
the number of the admirers rallying was kept down a little by the rarity,
of course, of intrinsic distinction. It wasn't, either, as if this blest
associate had been by constitution an elderly flirt, or some such sorry type,
addicted to vain philanderings with young persons he might have fathered: he
liked young persons, small blame to him, but they had never, under Gray's
observation, made a fool of him, and he was only as much of one about the
young lady in question, Cecilia Foy, yes, of New York, as served to keep all
later enquiry and pleasantry at the proper satiric pitch. She _would_ have
been a fine little creature, by our friend's beguiled conclusion, to have at
once so quickened and so appreciated the accidental relation; for was anything
truly quite so charming in a clever girl as the capacity for admiring
_disinterestedly_ a brave gentleman even to the point of willingness to take
every trouble about him? -- when the disinterestedness dwelt, that is, in the
[255] very pleasure she could seek and find, so much more creditable a matter
to her than any she could give and be complimented for giving, involved as
this could be with whatever vanity, vulgarity or other personal pretence.
  Gray remembered even his not having missed by any measure of his own need or
play of his own curiosity the gain of Miss Foy's acquaintance -- so might the
felicity of the quaint affair, given the actual parties, have been too sacred
to be breathed on; he in fact recalled, and could still recall, every aspect
of their so excellent time together reviving now in a thick rich light, how he
had inwardly closed down the cover on his stepfather's accession of fortune
-- which the pretty episode really seemed to amount to; extracting from it
himself a particular relief of conscience. He could let him alone, by this
showing, without black cruelty -- so little had the day come for his ceasing
to attract admirers, as they said, at public places or being handed over to
the sense of desertion. That left Gray as little as possible haunted with
the young Cecilia's image, so completely was his interest in her, in her
photograph and in her letters, one of the incidents of his virtually filial
solicitude; all the less in fact no doubt that she had written during the
aftermonths frequently and very advertisedly, though perhaps, in spite
of Mr Northover's gay exhibition of it, not so very remarkably. She was
apparently one of the [256] bright persons who are not at their brightest with
the pen -- which question indeed would perhaps come to the proof for him,
thanks to his having it ever so vividly, not to say derisively, from Horton
that this observer didn't really know what had stayed her hand, for the
past week, from an outpouring to the one person within her reach who would
constitute a link with the delightful old hero of her European adventure. That
so close a representative of the party to her romance was there in the flesh
and but a mile or two off, was a fact so extraordinary as to have waked up the
romance again in her and produced a state of fancy from which she couldn't
rest -- for some shred of the story that might be still afloat. Gray therefore
needn't be surprised to receive some sign of this commotion, and that he
hadn't yet done so was to be explained, Haughty guessed, by the very intensity
of the passions involved.
  One of them, it thus appeared, burnt also in Gussy's breast; devoted as she
was to Cissy, she had taken the fond anecdote that so occupied them as much
under her protection as she had from far back taken the girl's every other
interest, and what for the hour paralysed their action, that of the excited
pair, must simply have been that Mrs Bradham couldn't on the one hand listen
to anything so horrid as that her young friend should make an advance
unprepared and unaccompanied, and that the ardent girl, on the [257] other,
had for the occasion, as for all occasions, her ideal of independence. Gray
was not himself impatient -- he felt no jump in him at the chance to discuss
so dear a memory in an air still incongruous; it depended on who might propose
to him the delicate business, let alone its not making for a view of the great
Gussy's fine tact that she should even possibly put herself forward as a
proposer. However, he didn't mind thinking that if Cissy should prove all that
was likely enough their having a subject in common couldn't but practically
conduce; though the moral of it all amounted rather to a portent, the one that
Haughty, by the same token, had done least to reassure him against, of the
extent to which the native jungle harboured the female specimen and to which
its ostensible cover, the vast level of mixed growths stirred wavingly in
whatever breeze, was apt to be identifiable but as an agitation of the latest
redundant thing in ladies' hats. It was true that when Rosanna had perfectly
failed to rally, merely writing a kind short note to the effect that she
should have to give herself wholly, for she didn't know how long, to the huge
assault of her own questions, that might have seemed to him to make such a
clearance as would count against any number of positively hovering shades.
Horton had answered for her not turning up, and nothing perhaps had made him
feel so right as this did for a faith in those [258] general undertakings of
assurance; only, when at the end of some days he saw that vessel of light
obscured by its swing back to New York and other ranges of action, the sense
of exposure -- even as exposure to nothing worse than the lurking or pouncing
ladies -- became sharper through contrast with the late guarded interval; this
to the extent positively of a particular hour at which it seemed to him he had
better turn tail and simply flee, stepping from under the too vast orb of his
fate.
  He was alone with that quantity on the September morning after breakfast as
he had not felt himself up to now; he had taken to pacing the great verandah
that had become his own as he had paced it when it was still his uncle's,
and it might truly have been a rush of nervous apprehension, a sudden
determination of terror, that quickened and yet somehow refused to direct his
steps. He had turned out there for the company of sea and sky and garden, less
conscious than within doors, for some reason, that Horton was a lost luxury;
but that impression was presently to pass with a return of a queer force in
his view of Rosanna as above all somehow wanting, off and withdrawn verily to
the pitch of her having played him some trick, merely let him in where she was
to have seen him through, failed in fine of a sociability implied in all her
preliminaries. He found his attention caught, in one of his revolutions, [259]
by the chair in which Abel Gaw had sat that first afternoon, pulling him up
for their so unexpectedly intense mutual scrutiny, and when he turned away a
moment after, quitting the spot almost as if the strange little man's death
that very night had already made him apparitional, which was unpleasant, it
was to drop upon the lawn and renew his motion there. He circled round the
house altogether at last, looking at it more critically than had hitherto
seemed relevant, taking the measure, disconcertedly, of its unabashed
ugliness, and at the end coming to regard it very much as he might have eyed
some monstrous modern machine, one of those his generation was going to be
expected to master, to fly in, to fight in, to take the terrible women of
the future out for airings in, and that mocked at _his_ incompetence in such
matters while he walked round and round it and gave it, as for dread of what
it might do to him, the widest berth his enclosure allowed. In the midst of
all of which, quite wonderfully, everything changed; he _wasn't_ alone with
his monster, he was in, by this reminder, for connections, nervous ass as he
had just missed writing himself, and connections fairly glittered, swarming
out at him, in the person of Mr Bradham, who stood at the top of a flight of
steps from the gallery, which he had been ushered through the house to reach,
and there at once, by some odd felicity of friendliness, some pertinence of
presence, [260] of promise, appeared to make up for whatever was wrong and
supply whatever was absent. It came over him with extraordinary quickness that
the way not to fear the massed ambiguity was to trust it, and this florid,
solid, smiling person, who waved a prodigious gold-coloured straw hat as if in
sign of ancient amity, had come exactly at that moment to show him how.


                             -=-=-  2  -=-=-

Not the least pointed of the reflections Gray was to indulge in a fortnight
later and as by a result of Davey Bradham's intervention in the very nick was
that if he _had_ turned tail that afternoon, at the very oddest of all his
hours, if he had prematurely taken to his heels and missed the emissary from
the wonderful place of his fresh domestication, the article on which he would
most irretrievably have dished himself...
